#Minor List: Language Arts and the Scriptorium

__Examiner__: Prof. Christopher Baswell

##Rationale

In this list I have proposed to consider the intersection between pre-modern literary criticism and medieval book production. On the one hand, therefore, I have decided to investigate how medieval intellectuals interpreted, developed, and deployed the antique language arts of rhetoric and _grammatica_; on the other, I have focused on how manuscripts were conceived, prepared, and circulated, particularly in England, during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Many of the secondary readings that I have selected for this list analyze either of these sides. To ground my comprehension of literary theories and criticism in the Middle Ages, and in addition to Irvine's and Reynold's essays on the topic, I have chosen two generous anthologies of primary souces, essays, and surveys: _Medieval Grammar and Rhetoric_ and _The Idea of the Vernacular_. _Medieval Grammar and Rhetoric_ explores how Aristotelian science and Christian exegesis affected the role and the structure of the classical language arts, with an emphasis on the shifts in educational and hermeneutic practices during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. _The Idea of the Vernacular_ instead contains a collection of prologues that were written in Middle English during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, and which primarily questioned the role of the vernacular, especially when considered alongside Latin and French, in debates concerning authorship, audience, and linguistic prestige. The central issues that distinguish these two anthologies, the system of the language arts in one and the role of the vernacular in the other, are in fact deeply interwoven in medieval literary theory. As Rita Copeland explains in her book _Rhetoric, Hermeneutics and Translation in the Middle Ages_, the practice of vernacular translation was precisely the site where interpretation and invention, corresponding to the language arts of _grammatica_ and rhetoric, overlapped and often clashed. She further claims that translation, together with analogous practices of commentary and adaptation, ultimately offered medieval intellectuals an instrument to displace and appropriate notions of authority and prestige. To apply these concepts to the analysis of book production, as this list intends to do, I have selected a small collection of manuscripts that exemplify or complicate broader notions of interpretation and translation, and I have complemented it with a number of readings on scribal annotation, glossing, and multilingualism (Baswell, Kerby-Fulton). Finally, I have decided to add a number of secondary sources to guide my codicological analysis, either by providing me with the required terminology and methods (Bahr, Fein, Horobin, Doyle and Parkes), or by enriching my understanding of the historical, cultural, and economic circumstances surrounding and affecting the production of books (Birkholz, Gillespie and Wakelin, Mooney and Stubbs).
