In her study of _The English Romance In Time_, Helen Cooper explains how the presence of recognizable narrative and rhetorical motifs in the composition, transmission, and transformation of romances allowed their readers and writers to use them as an occasion for ethical debate and ideological exploration. Cooper claims that, as the genre developed its conventions, the authors and the audiences of romances began to share a system of expectations based off a repository of fictional elements and metaphorical correspondences, like the "rudderless boat" that carries Prudence in the _Man of Law's Tale_, or the "fairy mistress" who tricks the nameless knight in _The Wife of Bath's Tale_. These motifs, which Cooper compares to the ubiquitous "memes" of contemporary internet culture, eventually transcended the discrete works and contexts for which they were originally created, acquiring a sort of autonomous linguistic value.

More precisely, like linguistic signs, the "memes" of romance would progressively develop different, though related, meanings and connotations, which depended on the distinct historical and literary circumstances that characterized their distinct manifestations over time. The "rudderless boat," for instance, was initially mostly identified with the threatening unpredictability of fortune, and linked to Biblical narratives of divine trial and punishment, such as the whale in the book of Jonah, or the Flood in Genesis; in later texts where the "boat" appeared, however, writers tended to underline the salvation awaiting the passenger at the end of the journey, rather than the mortal danger experienced during it, and the motif became a reassuring emblem of providence. As they recycled and occasionally repurposed these narrative motifs, at times deliberately destabilizing their conventional implications, the composers and translators of romances would either meet or resist the expectations of their audiences, engaging them in a complex interpretive process whose ideal purpose, as Cooper suggests, was that of producing a pedagogically enriching debate.

One of these narrative motifs, mostly found in romances that elicited a conscious pedagogical response, presupposed the presence of "doubles." By "doubles" I mean two (at times four) mirroring and potentially interchangeable protagonists, who are often paradoxically defined by their lack of distinctive features, and especially of those features which would allow other characters, or the very audience of the story, to differentiate between them. Although Cooper does not explicitly discuss the historical development and figurative resonance of this recurring narrative "doubling," readers who today approach Marie de France's _Lai Le Fresne_, composed in the third quarter of the twelfth century, or the Middle English _Floris and Blancheflour_, dating from about a century later, still wonder - and, when possible, debate - about the role and potential interpretation of the twinning characters who inhabit these texts, and who make them memorable. To prompt and model this process of interpretation, the authors of these works often emphasize the conspicuous strangeness of the doubling characters, at times even suggesting tentative, though not entirely satisfying, ways to justify their striking likeness. Thus, for instance, the several hosts who welcome Floris and Blancheflour during their parallel journey don't miss a chance to reiterate how much they resemble each other, while the twin birth of Le Fresne and La Codre is explained as a consequence of their mother's adultery. 

In these two examples, "doubling" characterizes the portrayal and perception of two sisters, in the earlier work, and of a heterosexual couple, in the latter; in many cases, however, the "doubling" characters of romances are neither siblings nor lovers, but male friends, often implicated in a system of incompatible social and individual obligations. As I will demonstrate in my analysis of "doubles" in the two Middle English romances _Amis and Amiloun_ and _The Knight's Tale_, authors who consciously deploy this subset of the "doubling" motif usually confront their readers with demanding ethical or interpretive doubts, which, by taking the form of binary dilemmas, suggestively match the pairing of the two male friends. Moreover, the substitutions and identifications that these texts either evoke or enact between their mirroring "doubles" seem to thematize the problematic and shitfing identity of "romance" as a vernacular genre, defined by the translation, displacement and appropriation of foreign traditions.

While appropriating a continental tradition, and while possibly translating a pre-existent Anglo-Norman version of the same tale, the author of the Middle English _Amis and Amiloun_ adapted the formal features of his vernacular romance to the thematical "doubling" that characterized it. One of the most obvious, yet most effective, rhetorical strategies that fulfills this function in his poem consists in the strategic deployment of third person plural identifiers and verbs, in circumstances where we would expect distinct third person singulars; that is, to express the identity of action, thought and personality between the two main characters, the poet joins them under a collective "thei," preventing the reader from distinguishing between the "doubles." In the second stanza of the romance, for instance, the two heroes cannot be differentiated as they are born together, raised together, and knighted together. At this stage, as the narrator underlines, the reader does not even know their proper names.

> In wele and woo how thei gone wende,  
> And howe unknow thei were of kende,  
> The berdes bolde of chere;  
> And how thei were guode and hende,  
> And how yong thei become frende,  
> In courte where as thei were;  
> And how thei were dobbid knyght,  
> And how thei were trewth plyght,  
> The childerin both in ffere;  
> And in whate cuntre thei were born,  
> And whate the children names weren:  
> Hernkenyth, and ye may here.  

To further emphasize the motif of "doubling," the poet repeatedly introduces pairing phrases and structures. In this stanza not only we find the hendyadis of "guode and hende," a literal doubling of virtue used to describe the two heroes, but also the dual expression "wele and woo," repeated from the previous stanza (in a chiasmus, "How thei were in wele and woo," l. 12), and here standing for the entirety of the adventurous tale that involves the two male friends. Moreover, the anonymous author of _Amis and Amiloun_ consciously arranges the syntax and the content of the tail-rhyme stanza in order to imitate similarly twinning structures; in this case, the couplets that rhyme in "ende," "yght," and "orn" ("eren") all start with the conjunction "And." Alternating with the shorter line in "ere," this syntactic parallel prompts the reader to recognize and possibly vocalize a "doubling" structure as the stylistic pattern that informs the entire work. From a thematical standpoint, the contents of the two central sentences of this section are arranged in a chiasmus where the virtues of friendship are set against the interpersonal and hierarchical obligations of the court. To clarify, because the two "guode and hende" children have "become frende" in the first couplet, they will, as the second sentence explains, "trewth plyght" and always be "in ffere" (extremities of the chiasmus); but the causal link that justifies this oath is interrupted by, and therefore in contrast with, their social existence "In courte," which results in an alternative oath, being "dobbed knyght" (center of the chiasmus). The trope inverts the traditional disposition of the two domains, outside and inside, as if, at this stage, the public perception of the two heroes, their being "dobbed knyght," mattered less than the private indivisibility of their friendship.

This state of public and private indivisibility persists until, after having been hired as the dependents of their duke, Amis and Amiloun are assigned to different tasks. Like in the previous case, the poet consciously arranges the syntax of the tail-rhyme stanza to match the way that the two characters shift from a condition of intimate fusion to one of social detachment.

> Syre Amylion and sire Amys,  
> He toke hem both in grete affys,  
> In his court for to be.  
> Sire Amys, as ye mow here,  
> He made him his chief botelere,  
> [Ffor he was hend and fre];  
> Syre Amylion, over hem all,  
> He made him steward in his hall    
> To dight all his mayne.  

The two characters are first joined as the collective direct object that the duke "toke [...] in grete affys"; but then, precisely after they officially acquire an identifiable social position within the structure of the "court," here explicitly mentioned as a dividing line between the two circumstances, their individual names eventually appear as the discrete direct objects of two distinct sentences, when one becomes "chief botelere," and the other "steward in his hall." In fact, the entrance of the two friends into this aristocratic system of privileges and responsibilities triggers a sequence of events that eventually leads to their physical separation, occurring when Amiloun is sent back to his own country. It is in the context of a potential resistance to these social constrictions that the story of _Amis and Amiloun_ challenges its protagonists and its readers with a series of increasingly difficult ethical choices. 

These choices are in most cases binary alternatives that match the juxtaposition between the values of friendship and love on the one side, and the loyalty due to vassalatic hierarchy and divine authority on the other. Like the notion of "fin'amor" in _Tristan_, identified by Sarah Kay as an occasionally "asocial or even antisocial" principle, friendship seems to constitute the personal and affective end of the moral spectrum implied by the romance. The several socially disruptive choices made by the two characters would then correspond to the gratification of an intimate and mutual affection, marked by the alternative system of "trewthe" that unites not only Amis and Amiloun, but also Amis and his lover, Belisaunt. First, Amis chooses to sleep with Belisaunt, the daughter of his lord, disregarding his authority; later, Amiloun lies while swearing on his identity, thus sinning against religion for the sake of his friend. However, in the climax of this sequence of ethical choices, the Middle English author of the romance emphasizes how the dichotomy between the personal obligations of love and friendship and the public responsibilities of religion and authority are not as easily discernible. In the conclusion of the story, Amis is offered a chance to save Amiloun from the disease of leprosy, which he contracted miraculously as a punishment for his false oath. An angel explains that, if Amis wishes to cure Amiloun, he will have to kill his own children and bathe his friend in their blood. While the Anglo-Norman version of the story concisely reports the subsequent filicide as an inevitable option, possibly suggesting that the preservation of one's progeny is a social, not an individual responsibility, the Middle English author describes the scene in fine detail, prolonging the duration of the episode and voicing the magnitude of Amiloun's doubt.

> Alone himselfe, withoute mo,  
> To the chamber he gan go  
> Ther his childerin were,  
> And he beheld hem both two,  
> How faire they leyn togeder tho,  
> And pleyde both in fere.  
> Then said he, "Be seint John,  
> It ys grete routh you to slon,  
> That God hath bought so dere!"  
> His knyfe he had drawen that tyde;  
> Ffor sorow he stode hem besyde,  
> And wepte with reuly chere.  
>   
> When he had wept there he stode,  
> Anon he turned ayen his mode,  
> Withoute more delay:  
> "My brother that was trew and guode,  
> Ffor me he sched his own blode  
> To save my lyfe on day;  
> Whi schuld y than my childerin spare    
> To bryng my brother oute of care?"  

Contrary to the swift and cold treatment of the episode in the Anglo-Norman, in this version Amiloun complains "Ffor sorow" and weeps "with reuly chere" before murdering his two children. The poet drives the narration to a moment of temporal stasis and potential setback in action, as the father puts the knife aside and stands motionless by the two bodies. Eventually his speech inverts the previous system of moral associations. In this final circumstance, Amiloun defines friendship as a debt owned to a "brother," and he identifies it with an interpersonal obligation. Besides, his obligation to Amis now coincides with the religious instruction received by the angel, and it is alternative to the affective, intimate domain that is instead embodied by the paternal bond. The author of the Middle English _Amis and Amiloun_ therefore deploys the motif of "doubling" to stage an ethical and a pedagogical debate, establishing a set of binary ethical choices that ultimately converge towards an indistinguishable moment of identification.

Like the anonymous author of the Middle English _Amis and Amiloun_, Geoffrey Chaucer stages an ethical and pedagogical debate in _The Knight's Tale_, consciously deploying the traditional motif of the "double." Following Cooper's argument, one might even claim that it is precisely thanks to the presence of this recognizable motif that the poet can establish a productive set of expectations for the audience. The readers of this story of male friendship might expect that, conforming the tradition of _Amis and Amiloun_, the presence of the "double" Theban warriors Arcite and Palamon, imprisoned together and divided by their love for the same woman, might correspond to a similar sequence of binary and ultimately equivalent ethical choices, grounded in the analogy between the two heroes. However, writing at least six decades after the anonymous author of the older romance, Chaucer alternatively meets and frustrates these expectations, involving his audience in a puzzling, occasionally amusing, and ultimately educational process of interpretation. 

Although the narrator never explicitly mentions that the two characters should be regarded as physical or psychological "doubles," an identification between their two appearances and personalities is repeatedly and strategically suggested throughout the poem. But whereas this affinity was devised to produce wonder in the readers and the characters of _Amis and Amiloun_, the protagonists of _The Knight's Tale_ react to it with a sort of humorous frustration. As the narrative opens, the two friends are found "liggynge by and by" in the same "taas" of bodies; they are both pierced by similarly "grevous blody wounde," and "Bothe in oon armes, wrought ful richely." Like the anonymous author of _Amis and Amiloun_, Chaucer defers the mention of their names until the end of this collective description, joining their identities behind a concealing third person plural, similar to the "oon armes" that the two are wearing. This notion of "doubling" is then humorously reiterated when the two youths almost simultaneously fall in love with Emelye. Having spotted her through the bars of the cell, Palamon is the one who is first struck by the woman's beauty. Then, as he hears Arcite expressing an equivalent feeling, a few moments later, he reacts with an indignant incredulity that might have seemed almost comical to the readers of analogous romances.

> This Palamon, whan he tho wordes herde,  
> Dispitously he looked and answerde,  
> "Wheither seistow this in ernest or in pley?"  
> "Nay," quod Arcite, "in ernest, by my fey!"  
> God helpe me so, me list ful yvele pleye."  
> This Palamon gan knytte his browes tweye.  

Instead of passively submitting to the motif of "doubling," which in _Amis and Amiloun_ corresponded to the ethical and somatic equivalence between the two heroes, Arcite and Palamon resist their identification, which now appears to be an "yvele pleye" of fortune. Fortune in fact to serve their resistance to uniformity, differentiating their conditions and outward appearances. For a fortuitous circumstance, Arcite is freed from the prison and exiled from the city, while Palamon remains in the cell. Like the leprosy that disfigured Amiloun's body in the older romance, creating an asymmetry between the two "doubles," the sickness of love alters Arcite' but not Palemon's features. The exiled youth becomes "lene and drye as is a shaft," with "holwe and grisly" eyes and a "falow and pale" skin. While fortune and the will of the two characters seems to push against any identification, the poet's voice explicitly asks the readers to question the difference between their conditions, prompting the lovers in the audience to debate about "Who hath the worse, Arcite or Palamoun?" The denouement of the narrative turns this question into a rhetorical one. From a rhetorical standpoint, the two protagonists are again increasingly paralleled in the final section of the tale. One striking example of this identification is the description of their first fight, as told from Theseus' perspective.

> He was war of Arcite and Palamon,  
> That foughten breme as it were bores two.  
> The brighte swerdes wenten to and fro  
> So hidously that with the leeste stroook  
> It seemed as it wolde felle an oook. 
> But what they were, no thyng he ne woot.  

The bestial simile, one among the many that dehumanize the warriors of the second half of the poem, turns the two youths into two interchangeable "bores," caught in the heat of a fight that prevents any observer from determining "what they were." Moreover, this rhetorical homogeneity corresponds to a thematic one. Not only do Arcite and Palamone increasingly look like each other, reverting to a traditional treatment of "doubling"; their very actions become interchangeable, confusing the readers who might have wished to favor difference over sameness. The episode that most conspicuously confuses a reader is probably that of the prayer to the three deities that precedes the conclusive battle. Subverting a tentative identification of Arcite with the lovesick hero (as we have seen, he is disfigured by the intensity of his affection, and decides to become a servant of Emelye's), and of Palamon with the belligerent one (he fights his way out of prison, and he insists to win the woman in a duel), the narrator describes how Arcite chooses to invoke Mars, while Palamon visits Venus' temple. Paradoxically, then, the confusion caused by this dichotomy in fact returns the two friends to their initial state of affinity, when Palamon had mistaken Emelye for Venus.

Acknowledging a similar mistake, the readers of the tale are therefore initially prompted to associate the two heroes, regarding them as "doubles"; then, adapting to the opposition of Arcite's and Palamon's wills and the ensuing changes in fortune, they are supposed to resist this identification, increasingly differentiating between their features and personalities; finally, in the formal and thematic fusions of their bodies and personalities, the audience is induced to identify them again. By meeting and resisting the expectations of this audience, Chaucer has deployed the motif of "doubling" as a way to support, exemplify, and model a Boethian reading of this romance. As Theseus explains in his final speech, despite the resistance of our free will and the apparent material changes caused by fortune, the single force that integrates every manifest difference is providence, the system of causality arranged by "The Firste Moevere of the cause above." In their response to the motif of "doubling," which in _Amis and Amiloun_ shaped and undermined a series of binary ethical choices, the readers of the tale are ultimately instructed to perceive the unity that is concealed by difference. The teaching is eventually voiced by the same Palamon, who in his response to Theseus, at the end of the battle, explains how "We have the deeth disserved bothe two. | Two woful wrecches been we, two caytyves, | That been encombred of oure owene lyves." Rather than expressing his resistance to "doubling," the warrior now embraces the motif and its ethical implications, underlining the pedagogical purpose of the tale.

Besides its pedagogical purposes, in my conclusion I would like to suggest how the development of the motif of "doubling" between the end of the XIII century, when the anonymous author of _Amis and Amiloun_ was working, and the last decades of the XIV century, when Chaucer was compiling his _Canterbury Tales_, might suggest a shift in the perception of vernacular translation. In his essay on _Genre Without System_, Alfred Hiatt explains how the identity of "romaunce" as a literary form was "unstable and non-systematic" in the late Middle Ages. Given its double linguistic affiliation, its reference to Rome and its French sound, the term was generally associated with ideas of foreignness, and with "border and cultural crossings, translations and transformations." The image analyzed by Hiatt in the introduction to this piece compares the mentions of the word to the destabilizing insertion of a foreign object in an otherwise recognizable context. In particular, he describes how the anonymous author of "To Rosamounde" introduces a "fish in bread sauce," an item taken from "the market, the pantry, the economy," in the first lines of his balade, together with a reference to the quintessential character of romance, "Tristam." 

Many similar images found in vernacular romances seem to suggest an analogous identification between economical transactions and the "translations and transformations" that characterized the genre. In _Amis and Amiloun_, the exchanges and transfers between the two identical friends might correspond to the complex genealogy of the tale, originated by a Latin story written in the eleventh century and later extensively translated into "most of the written vernaculars of Medieval Europe" (LeSaux). To corroborate this reading, the Middle English author of the version that we have considered adds a conspicuous detail that seems to facilitate, but eventually hinders, these exchanges. Before the two friends part their ways, Amiloun buys, for "three hundred pound," two identical "golde cuppys" that ideally would, in the tradition of the motif of "agnition," help them recognize each other in their future meetings. However, it is precisely because of this golden cup that Amiloun mistakes his disfigured friend for an impostor, and at the crucial moment of "agnition" he starts kicking and beating Amis. The tokens of an urban economy of trade exchange, the seemingly interchangeable gold cups do not produce the intended appropriation and displacement of prestige and authority that would correspond to an ideal translation of this continental narrative. 

On the other hand, in the _translatio imperii et studii_ endeavored by Chaucer in his adaptation of Boccaccio's epic _Teseida_, the original poem is most conspicuously enriched and transformed in the central section, when the two friends are not "doubles," and clearly discernible. Chaucer's alteration of the Italian text is most visible in the serious digressions and complaints that prepare the reader for the Boethian teaching of the conclusion, while the moments that most explicitly conform to the classicizing project of the source, like the duel and the fight, when both heroes are similarly dehumanized "doubles," are treated as a parody. Writing ten decades after the supposed failure of translation embodied by _Amis and Amiloun_, is Chaucer suggesting that, from a literary standpoint, his desire to preserve difference rather than identity in the "doubling" process of translation is a merit rather than a flaw?