In her historical and theoretical analysis of the York Corpus Christi Plays, _Signifying God_, Sarah Beckwith defines the project of the cycle as one of "sacramental theater." She claims that the many simultaneous performances occurring in the city during this single day of celebration, and involving not only "a tenth of its population" but also a complex system of social and economical interactions, allowed the community to perform a collective ritual of religious identification. This ritual constituted a meditation on the sacrament of the Eucharist, remembered on the same day; it implied that the people who were staging and watching these productions would eventually better understand the notions of embodiment and presence evoked by the host. Besides, the performances paralleled and somehow equaled the sacrament of confession, since the performers and the audience were similarly asked to consider their own sins, and perhaps ultimately atone for them. 

For Beckwith, this kind of "sacramental theater" is possible when the two rhetorical figures that govern Christianity, synecdoche and metaphor, operate simultaneously. On the one hand, synecdoche is the trope that allows a community to identify with an individual; in the case of the York Corpus Christi Plays, this identification occurred thanks to the many "Christs, Satans, and Maries" who were wandering around the city at the same time. On the other hand, metaphor is the principle enabled not only the transfers of physical attributes and metaphysical sins that justified the sacraments of the Eucharist and the Confession, but also the very notion of Christian salvation, for which the sins of all mankind can be transferred onto the single body of Jesus. 

In this thorough analysis, nevertheless, Beckwith seems to overlook the vital role that affect must have had in the process of devising and staging these plays. A deliberate affective involvement was needed not only to provide an opportunity for the metaphorical processes of collective identification, leading to the sacramental function of the cycle, causing the audience to transfer their feelings of love and repentance onto those bodies that were "signifying" God - and themselves; it was also a necessary premise for the synecdoche of the performance, that is, for the moment when the actor who played the role of Adam, or Noah, or Thomas had to reflect and represent the entire community. By strategically modeling the affective reactions of the actors and of the audience, the anonymous authors of the York Corpus Christi Plays effectively shifted from the remote transcendence of the Scripture to the immediate presence of the performance. 

An exemplary play to study the strategic modeling and deployment of affect in the York Corpus Christi Chycle is that of _Abraham and Isaac_. The exemplary story of the patriarch's submission to divine will allows the author of the play to guide the response of its audience from a condition of detached intellectual acceptance - or incredulity - to one of affective identification and ultimately pious love. When the play starts the audience hears Abraham raising a prayer to thank God.

Grett God, that alle this world has wrought
And wisely wote both gud and ille,
I thanke hym thraly in my thoght
Of alle his lave he lens me tille.
That thus fro barenhede has me broghte,
A hundereth wynter to fulfille,
Thou graunte me myght so that I mowght
Ordan my werkis aftir thi wille,
For in this erthely lyffe
Ar non to God more boune
Then is I and my wyffe,
For frenshippe we have foune.

In his speech, Abraham thoughtfully lists the reasons that justify his gratitude for God. His syntax deploys many causal subordinates, such as "that alle," "That thus," and the two "For," and it suggests a parallel between himself and God that is based on ideas of rational order; in the same way that God "wisely wote both gud and ille," he intends to "Ordan [_his_] werkis after [_His_] wille." Abraham now understands and appreciates the divine presence only intellectually, while "lave," love, is simply regarded as one of the many gifts that proceed unilaterally from God to him.

This exclusively intellectual response to God and His will shapes Abraham's initial reaction to the divine instruction communicated to him by the angel, asking him to sacrifice his only son. Abraham answers to this request with a feeling of cognitive surprise and wonder, but not grief; he is incredulous because the order seems illogical, "a ferly fare," not cruel. However, he resolves to obey to the bidding of the angel, and prepares his son and his servants for a journey to the site of the sacrifice. Like other unnamed and popular characters that inhabit the cycle, the servants seem deliberately introduced to model the response of the audience. In this case, they simultaneously express a firm determination to obey to the demand of their superior, because "To fulfille yt is goode reasoune," and a state of intellectual uncertainty, since "Bott what thei mene certayne | Have I na knowlage clere."

Both Abraham and Isaac remain in this state of quiet acquiescence and intellectual crisis during their long ascent to the hill of the sacrifice; moreover, this crisis never causes an affective reaction. In fact, both father and son decide to resist any sort of open affective display. After having asked his father to provide him with a logical reason for the sacrifice, in vain, Isaac states that he "sall not grouche there agayn," and asks his father to "morne noght for" him. Accordingly, Abraham insists that he will "noght gaynesaye, | Nor never make mornys nor mone | To make offerand of thee this day." Conforming to the purely intellectual stance adopted by Abraham in the opening speech, then, the two characters intend to reject any sort of emotional manifestation in the event that will ensue. But this intention is not fulfilled. Having reached the peak of the hill, and having prepared for the execution of the sacrifice, the two characters suddenly begin incorporating the language of affect in their speech. First, Isaac's "flesshe waxis faynte for ferde," as he realizes that "lyff is full swete," while "The drede of dede dose all [_his_] dere"; his visible fear of death, embodied in the pallor that grows on his face, and caused by a universally acceptable love for the sweetness of mortal life, then prompts an affective reaction in his father.

> Nay, nay, sone, nay, I thee behete  
> That do I noght, withouten were.  
> Thy wordis makis me my wangges to wete  
> And chaunges, childe, ful often my cheere.  

Although he is still asserting that he will not hesitate to fulfill God's will, Abraham's speech is now very distant from the rationally structured, syntactically composed tone of his opening speech. The repetition of "Nay" is unique for the play, and it might in fact correspond to a manifestation of anger and dissatisfaction against God's bidding. Moreover, triggered by the countenance and especially the "wordys" of his son, his features change uncontrollably, manifesting his sudden and irreversible affective response to his grief. After having prompted the audience to intellectually appreciate the perfect wisdom of divine order, Abraham now instructs the same audience on how to feel what his son is feeling. This shift from an intellectual to an affective relationship with God is the purpose of the performance, as the Angel who stops Abraham from completing the sacrifice explains to him. Like the performance of the sacrifice in the Old Testament, the performance of this episode in York has to teach performers and spectators that God's instruction is above all to "Luk ye hym love, this is his liste." Through the affective experience of the simulated sacrifice, the rational gratitude initially vindicated by Abraham has turned into a genuine feeling of love.

This feeling love has to be represented and transmitted to the community of York, and therefore drawn from the remote, transcendent atemporality of the Old Testament into the present time of their performance. The author of _Abraham and Isaac_ seems indeed aware of the fact that the translation of the episode from the eternally valid truth of the Scripture into the malleable here and now of the vernacular performance involves a conscious manipulation of time. While Abraham's initial prayer describes past events and divine casuality with the composed detachment of the Biblical text, juxtaposing the present perfect tense of creation ("alle this world has wrought") with the past simple of his own old story, the conclusion of his speech introduces an urgent "Nowe" that becomes one of the structural elements of the play. The "Now" is repeated again in the last stanza of his monologue, and then becomes the first word uttered by the angel as he delivers his message from God: "Now bodeword unto thee I brynge." This monosyllabic temporal adverb marks a sense of urgency and presence that is then mirrored by an increasing temporal compression, evident when the reiterated "thre daies" of the "jornay" to the hill become few instants in the actual time of the performance. 

Time accelerates and decelerates in the system of the Corpus Christi Plays; more specifically, it accelerates and decelerates to create an affective response. The monosyllabic "Now," first introduced when the angel descends to Abraham, returns as the patriarch and his son eventually provoke in themselves and in their audience the affects of fear and sorrow that are actually instrumental to their conclusive appropriation of divine love. The adverb is uttered more than times in this short section; the most memorable ones, nevertheless, are those in which Abraham "pray[_s_]" Isaac to "kyss [_him_] hartely," and Issac responds with a "Nowe farewele," and the request to "take [_his_] swerde" and complete the sacrifice. The present time of the vernacular performance, emphasized by the repetition of "Now," is therefore identified with the time of lively affective responses, and set against the atemporal detachment and intellectual casuality of the Scripture. The typological story of Abraham and Isaac, the simulated sacrifice that anticipates Christ's actual sacrifice on the cross, is therefore deployed as a model for two notions of time, eternal and present, and two kinds of modeled response, intellectual and affective.

This double model of time and response, depending on a learned understanding of typological history and on an intimate yet flexible relationship with the biblical text, suited well the guild that probably supervised the production of the play, the "Parchemyners and Bokebynders." Behind these concepts of eternal, intellectual atemporality and present, affective temporality, we can perceive the presence of two categories of readership and textuality, loosely corresponding to the customary connotations that the vernacular forms of prose and poetry had developed by the second half of the fourteenth century. In her analysis of the literary theory practiced by Chaucer and other Middle English authors of the time, Eleanor Johnson explains how, for these writers, prose was mostly deployed as a way to convey the perfect relations of casuality that informed God's providential and consolatory project. Poetry, on the other hand, could at times correspond to a monological, lyrical voice by which an author might attempt to prompt empathy and identification in the reader. An exemplary combination of these two modes can be found in the cunning narrative voice that organizes the distinct sections of Chaucer's _Troilus and Criseyde_. As Johnson explains, here the narrator strategically shifts between a detached exposition of his sources, corresponding to a "pseudoprose," and lyrical digressions conceived as a way to prompt an affective response in the audience. The alternation between the two forms, corresponding to two temporalities, would ideally model an ethical transformation shared by the reader and the poet, prompted by the experience of literature, and defined as "protreptic." In their manipulation of temporalities and affective or intellectual responses, motivated by two different experiences of the text, the York Corpus Cycle Plays seem to model an analogous project.

In the case of _Abraham and Isaac_, the manipulation of temporalities and the shift from an intellectual to an affective mode would ideally model a positive transformation for the spectators, prompting them to experience love for God's presence and will. However, this is not the only pattern of transformation enabled by affect in the York cycle. The plays that focus on the New Testament narrative of the Nativity and the Passion, for instance, would favor the experiences of communal identification and sacramental meditation described by Beckwith by representing and provoking the misunderstandings and the wrongdoings that surrounded the crucifixion. Rather than feeling empathy for a single character, conforming to his itinerary of positive ethical transformation, the watchers of these plays are repeatedly compelled to question their sympathetic distance or proximity to each one of the bodies interacting with Christ. Like in the case of Abraham, this sequence of affective transformations is accomplished through a conscious manipulation of time and affective response.

Time and affective response initially seem to facilitate an identification between the audience and the protagonist of _Joseph's Troubles about Mary_. On the one hand, Joseph explicit belongs to a present and temporal domain. While Abraham opened his monologue with a combination of present perfect and simple past tenses, Joseph's speech urges the audience to participate in the "nowe" of his present state: "I me mene," "I am," "I may."  Unlike Abraham, Joseph conspicuously bears the signs of his "grete elde" age: his slow pace, his being "Wayke and al unwelde," and his incapacity to "buske ne belde." Besides, unlike Abraham, he repeats the monosyllabic adverb "Now" five times in the first four stanzas of his monologue. Together with his urgent presence in time, Joseph immediately seeks the empathy of the audience by describing his strong affective reaction to the mysteries of the Scripture, the "grete mornyng" that, as the first line of his speech explains, the incomprehensible pregnancy of Mary has caused in him. We learn that Joseph's doubt is caused by a temporal discrepancy between the limits of his understanding, bounded by his existence in the present, and the transcendent eternity of the Scripture. As he explains, he cannot reconcile the tangible, present sign of Mary's pregnancy, her being "with childe full grete, | That makes [_him_] sorowe unsoght," with his knowledge of the "prophicie" written about her. But instead of provoking the detached intellectual incredulity that characterized Abraham, this doubt has made him sad, angry, and frustrated. The ensuing dialogue with Mary juxtaposes his empathetic, present reaction with her temporal and affective detachment, exemplified by the paucity of her short replies and by her sitting "at hir boke full faste prayand" at the beginning of the exchange. This clash of affect and time eventually culminates in a moment of apparent temporal stasis, the comical core of the play, where language seems to have lost its present effectiveness and Joseph keeps misunderstanding Mary's explanations about the son being "[_his_] and Goddis will." Joseph's doubt is therefore staged as a present, affective reaction to the atemporal intellectual mystery of divine will.

The resolution of Joseph's doubt, therefore, coincides with the moment when divine will becomes both present and capable of an affective response. In the history of Christianity, this moment of course coincides with Nativity. Paradoxically, then, the doubt is resolved not when Joseph becomes capable of an intellectual and transcendent understanding of the mystery, but when the mystery reaches him in the form of a present affective demand. The conclusion of _Joseph's Troubles about Mary_ explains the character's obligations precisely in these terms. The angel who visits Joseph asks him to wake up, emphasizing that his visitation does not occur in the atemporal domain of a dream, but in the tangible temporality that the character can understand and respond to. Moreover, the angel's message does begin by expounding the complex theological question of Incarnation, but by assigning to him a concrete task, rooted in earthly affect. Joseph must "take bettir kepe To Marie," because he makes "her herte full sare | That loves [_him_] alther best." The implication of this concrete bidding is that Nativity coincides with this present affective response. Indeed, the affective core of the following play, that of _The Nativity_, is precisely Joseph's discovery of the "swete thyng" that is on Mary's "kne," the infant Jesus. The scene, and the ethical transformation involving Joseph in the York Corpus Christi cycle, culminates with his enthusiastic hymn dedicated to the baby.

> Nowe, welcome, floure fairest of hewe,  
> I shall thee menske with mayne and myght.  
> Hayle, my maker, hayle Crist Jesu,  
> Hayle, riall kyng, roote of all right;  
> Hayle, Saveour,  
> Hayle, my Lorde, lemer of light,  
> Hayle, blessid floure.  

Not only do these anaphoric "Hayle" convey his positive and present affective response to the "floure fairest of hewe" that is the embodiment of divinity in history; the multiplication of identifiers deployed to name the newborn, "maker," "roote of all right," "Saveour," "Lorde" and "lemer of light," correspond to an actual theological comprehension of the complexity of this mystery, an intellectual response that complements the affective one. In the conclusion of this scene, therefore, Joseph has been able to combine reason and affect, incorporating the atemporal eternity of the "prophicie" written about Mary into his present understanding of time. The mute, infant body of Jesus in this scene is the affective presence that enables this transformation.

The mute body of Jesus, however, does not correspond to a similar affective and intellectual transformation in the conclusion of the evangelical cycle, when his presence on stage provokes antithetical responses. While the characters of the fiction respond to his silent endurance with a mix of frustration and anger, the audience should feel empathy for his suffering. The affective response provoked by these plays is therefore conflicting; the spectators should simultaneously reject and embrace the display of violence and injustice that compose the narrative of the Passion, particularly because it is thanks to this violence and this injustice that the collective sins of mankind have been redeemed. This complex juxtaposition of affective responses, corresponding to an analogous manipulation of time, especially characterizes the _The Second Trial before Pilate_. 

In this play the Roman prefect embodies, like Joseph before his transformation, a combination of present temporality and misdirected affect. Like many of the powerful men that we hear in the York Corpus Christi plays (Herod, Caiaphas, and Satan), Pilate deploys an extravagantly alliterative line. He explains, for instance, that he will not tolerate any violation of his injunctions, and that, under his rule, "What traytoures his tong with tales has trapped, | That fende for his flateryng full foull sall be falland." This excessive alliteration seems to correspond to Pilate's limited perception of time, repetitive and somehow stuck in a temporal stasis, reminiscent of Joseph's comical misunderstanding in his first exchange with Mary. Besides, as these lines exemplify, Pilate's presence in history is matched by his obsession for the verbal language of "tong" and "tales," contrasting with Christ's refusal to speak. As they eventually meet, the two characters therefore seem to proceed from two distinct temporalities. Pilate's repetitive verbosity corresponds to Joseph's present tense, while Christ's quietness, like Mary's, connects him with the eternity of the Scripture. Having experienced the mystery of Nativity, the audience directs its affective and intellectual attention towards the latter. Surprisingly, however, the encounter constitutes a brief epiphany for Pilate, who momentarily becomes the model for the affect of wonder and devotion that the audience should direct towards Jesus's body.

> Slike a sight was nevere yit sene. Come sytt,  
> My comforth was caught fro me clene, I upstritt,  
> I my myght noght abstene  
> To wirschip hym in wark and in witte.  

Unlike Joseph's experience before and during the Nativity, however, this coincidence of time and affect between Christ, the audience, and Pilate is short lived. Like the spectators of the performance, the prefect cannot stop the trial, flagellation, and execution of Jesus. After having shared with him the wonder and admiration of this divine presence, the audience is asked to participate in his grief and his frustration, the affects that should lead to the genuine contrition which, following Beckwith, we might associate with the "sacramental theater" of confession.