#De Planctu Naturae##From the introduction (by Wintrhop Wetherbee)###Author- Born at Lille (Northern France), around 1120;- __Doctor universalis__ of the _liberal arts_ (__7__) - between the Loire valley and Chartres (centre France)- Taught in Paris, spent time in Provence (never left France, apparently);- His epitaph: 	- _Alanum breuis hora breui tumulo sepeliuit | Qui duo, qui septem, qui totum scibile sciuit._ (__duo__: the _Testaments_; __septem__: the _artes_);- According to this preface, he was _Perhaps the most important Latin poet of his day_- -- an innovative theologian and one of the founders of systematic theology --- -- an apologist who attacked the Cathars and Waldensians and defended Christianity against Jews and Muslims --- the author of a __treatise on preaching__ and a __manual for confessors__ that are __among the first of their kind__- his diverse writing are __unified by a theologian's concern with the relations between nature and the divine and with the problem of expressing these relations in language__;- _the intellectual was emerging as a social type_;- a universe that was essentially that of Plato's _Timaeus_, as interpreted by Calcidius, Macrobius, and the anonymous author of the Hermetic _Asclepius_;- Alan's model of the physical universe, though it reflects a sophisticated appreciation of the cosmological thought of his mentors, is in the end simple and conventional. His emphasis is on its moral and spiritual implications, and he keeps both ancient science and the Neoplatonism of the late antique interpreters of Plato at a distance.###The work- written no later than the 1160s, when Alan was perhaps teaching in one of the cathedral schools;- "survives in more than one hundred manuscripts [...] widely read throughout medieval Europe"- indebted to __Bernardus Silvestris__ and his _Cosmographia_ (wonderful title) of 1147;- "From Bernardus, and from their great common exemplars, Boethius and Martianus Capella, Alan learned to cast complex intellectual issues in literary form, and his career as a poet was largely defined by a sustained dialogue with the _Cosmographia_;- "The _De Planctu Naturae_ is closely engaged with a world where language itself and hence poetry as well have lost the power to express natural love and the values implicit in the order of nature. Poetic language conveys the effect of the corruption of human nature in the form of bizarre rhetoric, obscene puns , paradox, and ambiguity, and this crisis creates a corresponding crisis in the level of poetics." (breaking of __form__, breaking of an __ethical world__ of values)- deeply indebted to Boethius as well.- "Its divine Nature is a largely autonomous power whose laws govern the reproduction of created life and provide a standard for social and moral order."- Alan's personified Nature is inherited from the _Cosmographia_ of Bernardus Silvestris.- "That the forces essential to human survival are capable of undermining human self-realization is the central issue in the _De Planctu Naturae_. Nature's lament is an existential counterweight to the authoritarian idealism of Boethius's Philosophy, a sad answer to Philosophy's wish that the love that orders the heavens might govern the human spirit."	- Crucial description of a __conflict__ which we should try to understand better. Sexuality seems to be a part of nature, but also one of its enemies. A natural, primitive force.- "Nature then appears, and vicious troping is replaced by a luminous prose description of the goddess and her raiment, but the tortured elegiacs of the proem have revealed a paradox that will become more obvious as the dialogue proceeds. In establishing an __equivalence__ between __rhetorical trope__ and __homoerotic act__, the Poet has implicated himself, for the linguistic _vitia_ he condemns are of his own devising, and Nature herself cannot express her concern over the condition of sinful mankind without employing them. The healthy "natural" rhetoric Nature demands is steadily displaced by what she will later call _falsigraphia_."- "That Nature's most vivid poetry should be evoked by Cupido tells us that poetry itself is now a function of a new and ambiguous power, its rhetoric and imagery generated by the manifold forms in which natural love manifests itself."###Commentary- __1__: Prosimetrum; the function of poetry is that of displaying the perfect order of nature; and that of creating a sort of objective, perfectly crafted beauty that can arouse desire in the reader.- __1__-__60__: The striking quality of the first _metrum_ is that of closely associating _grammar_ and _order_. The order of nature is the order of grammar.	1. The real surprise here is that _language_  - the sheer manipulation of Latin, of its categories, of its structure - is what allows for the very primordial __imagination__ of the corruption of the natural world. We have to think about this more slowly: the fact is that __grammar__ functions as a laboratory allowing for the abstract manipulation of natural forms - of natural elements. Natural elements can be mixed and made to interact in a new way - in an unreal, intangible way - as they are first translated into the categories of grammar (nouns, verbs; and gender).		- The fact that __gender__ is above all a grammatical necessity - at times completely separated from sexuality - should be constantly stressed.- __5__-__10__: the constant figures of this _metrum_ seem to be:	1. __alliteration__ (of course; although - keep that in mind - alliteration is often also a device used to stress the artificiality of language itself - language that constructs analogy out of the arbitrariness of its economy		1. That is, the discovery of a Saussurian principle of arbitrariness - after (and against) the Etymologies of Isidore and so forth - is unsettling; new languages, the fall of Latin, produced the need and the awareness that words are conventions, that words do not mean anything.	2. the second device being __homonymy__	3. the third device being __adnomination__ (crucial)- Let's look at __lines 7-8__:	- _Non fraus tristitiem, non fraudis fletus adulter | non dolus, immo dolor, parturit immo partuit._- __18__: great creativity here; _hermafroditat_ is treated as a __verb__; we might say that for AdL Latin was pretty much a live language, capable of being mutated and bent according to the present purpose.- __22__ Another great quotation	- _Ars illi non placet, immo tropus_- __31-32__: It is, perhaps, possible to get the impression that there is an ideal of poetry - and nature - that does not offend AdL's sensibility - a positive model that has been lost. "Thus the dactylic practice of Venus becomes a crude iambic, in which the long syllable does not accept the short."	- It would be interesting to understand whether AdL is referring to a specific change in poetical practice; nevertheless, it is important to remark how perversion is _at the same time_ the __intrinsic__ danger of poetry and a more general __perversion__ of poetry - that is, poetry is said to be generally bad, and then capable of being perverted (therefore, originally not that bad).- __43__ - _Virginis in labiis cur basia tanta quiescunt, cum reditus in eis sumere nemo velit?_ - Why isn't anyone kissing this beautiful woman, the beautiful woman being __Nature__ but also __every woman__? __Production of desire__. Positive sensuality; sensuality triggered by form; sensuality assisted by poetry.- __55__ - Some Ovidian myths here; AdL complains the disappearance of heterosexual desire - the same desire that can become dangerous for whom follows it.- __prose 2__ - the leading idea is, of course, that of __order__.	- Then there is the whole aspect of desire; the presence of __Nature__, her description, the articulation of the various parts of her body in the first prose, is an attempt at eliciting an authentic desire in the reader.	- A beautiful human body - a beautiful female human body- __p2.5__: look at the way in which the description of the body shifts to a description of the __crown__; so - female body (face, arms, waist, sex); then her character (animation; the tears - that is, her inner activity, her psychology), and finally the crown on her head, becoming the astral world - and allowing her to work as a metaphor for the cosmos;	- More could be said about this transition; the microcosm is the female body - her breasts like apples (analogy, simile, becoming already a form of extension towards the rest of the world), the __cosm__ is her head, is a second detail - the __macrocosm__ follows the __microcosm__ and is contained within it; also notice how the transition between the __microcosm__ and the __macrocosm__ is marked by the psychological annotation - that is, by the observation of her sad character.	- at this point (p.__2.8__) the description __clearly__ becomes an __allegory__.- __p.2.10-11__: The __ekphrasis__ seem to theorize the relationship between __language__ and __nature__ on a principle of constant analogy - of constant mirroring; in a way, then, nature __is__ like language; nature should not be distinguished from language.- __p.2.12__: in a way, the game is here complex, articulate, skillful - it aligns __macrocosm__ and __microcosm__ through the means of artistic reproduction - the __planets__ are signified by the __stones__ by the means of _art_ itself; _art_ becomes a way to turn _ekphrasis_ into _allegory_.	- the impression is that Latin is used as a way of conveying __order__ in the _proses_, and __ambiguity__ in the _metra_ (__p.2.19__);	- notice how the sequence of transitions really seem to create the sensation of an optical illusion, of a trompe d'oeil, or of a mise en abyme (pick one - each is appropriate somehow) (__p.2.19__) - we are moving from the crown, to the dress, to the __dreamlike effect of art__ depicted on it, and containing _a council of the creatures of the air.	- The text is, of course, about the regulation of heterosexual love; heterosexual and monogamous love. The parts regarding __animals__ and their behavior could be easily associated to the observation of animal sexuality in Ovid, and to the allegorical understanding of natural life in bestiaries (after the _Physiologus_).		- Prescribing desire.- 2.25: "artificio subtili lasciviens, pelii gerebat officium" - _it playfully displayed the subtlety of her artistry_- 2.26: the ekphrasis becomes a taxonomy. every taxonomy is a vocabulary, a lexicon; defines the meaning of _foreign_ words. _art object_ - (vocabulary) (ekphrasis) - _allegory_ - _synechdoche_.- 2.27: the fish; notice the vocabulary of _pleasure_, and the antrhopocentrism of creation.- 2.28: "in quibus quaedam picturae incantatio terrestria animalia vivere faciebat" - _make live the animals_.- 2.29: animals are always _useful to men_; even when all that they do is contributing to meaning - making signs (teachings, parables) of their _bodies_.- 2.32: the _fiction_ of animals who want to be _like humans_. "illic vulpecula, idiotiam bruti exciens animalia, ad meliorem hominis anhelabant astutiam."- 2.33: "has animalium figuras hystrionalis figurae representatio quasi iocunditatis convivia oculis donabat videntium."- 2.34: the shoes and underclothing - _hidden_ - represent _vegetation_: "herbarum arborumque naturis."- met. 3: _on the flowers depicted on nature's feet_; the metrum seems to be simply a display of the poet's skill. there are assonant couplets, and lots of alliterative _f_s (fricatives); displaying how language (art) can be arranged into beauty.- 4.1: the maiden (puella) is actually __drawing figures__ on a tablet when we first see her. _writing on a tablet_ - which does not last.- 4.2: a mysterious man is guiding juno's descent. "homo vero..." reference to the stability of his gaze. _abbaglio_.- 4.2: the latin actually creates an ambiguity in determining the source of the _abbaglio_. - is it the puella or the homo?- 4.3: increase of light as the woman approaches the poet.- 4.4-4.5: there is a sort of _cosmic setting_ here - it is unclear where the scene might actually be taking place.- 4.6: "sic rerum universitas, ad virginis fervens obsequium, miro certamine laborabat sibi virginis gratiam comparare." - this universitas is the combination of _pagan divinities_ and _natural forces_ (agents: aeolus, proserpina; fish, earth, sea).- met. 5: again, poetry is used to express _beauty and order_.- 6.1: "nec vivens nec mortuus, inter utrumque _neuter_ laborabam"	1. neutral as a grammatical category, transferred onto the poet;	2. appearance of the lyrical subject, the poetic voice.- 6.2: a lot about _language_ here. "mentales intellectus materialis vocis mihi depinxit imagine, et quasi archetipa verba idealiter praeconcepta vocaliter produxit in actum." images - sounds - images.- 6.3: typical boethian material here - forgetting the self, clouded thought. dulled senses and reason. not recognizing nature, _unable to remember Nature_.- 6.4-7: the making of the _human_, rational centre of the universe: "sic in homine sensualitatis rationisque continua reperitur hostilitas." - reason vs. sensuality. (plato's horses.)- 6.9: political order of _divinity_ and creation.- 6.10-12: nature finds ways of describing the role of humanity and its virtues through _analogy and allegory_. (body - the physical body, and its organs - and the state).- 6.14: defining the relationship between _Nature and God_.- 6.16: the role of _theology_ as a way of accessing knowledge of the divine, the intimate, secret forms of existence.- 6.17: "ut dei potentia superlativa, naturae comparativa, hominis positiva dicatur." - language and its categories as a way of understanding (to understand) the categories of physical and metaphysical existence. _logos_ - reason, language; understanding, grammar.- 6.19: a pun: "per haec verba michi natura (Natura) naturae suae faciem develaret."	- the language of this book can be wonderfully vivid.	- "et per hanc ammonitionem, velut quodam potionis remedio, omnes fatasiae reliquas quasi nauseans stomachus mentis evomuit."- met. 7: the first question posed by the _narrator_ is in verse. it is a small broken poem. it's a __hymn__.	- nature as the demiurge - nature as a __form__; nature as __change__. "quae novis caeli faciem figuris, protheans, mutas" (ll. 29-30); the face of the world that stays the same, as it changes.	- ambiguous language of wooing a lover - why are you crying, nature?	- the _anaphora_ is here the unchanging shape of nature - always recognizable; _quae_, _quae_, _quae_.- 8.3: man as the exception: the language of _depravity and prostitution_.- 8.6-7: reprise: nature and order in _change_, the principles of metamorphosis.- 8.8: "humanum namque genus a sua generositate degenerans, in constructione generum barbarizans, venereas regulas invertendo nimis irregularis utitur __metaplasmo__"	- the whole passage is phenomenal. "directam predicationem per compositionem inordinate convertit"	- "a veneris ergo orthographia deviando..."		- phenomenal passage.- 8.9: "qui formae florem in vitia efflorendo deflorant"- 8.10: ovidian sequence of myths (and ovidian playfulness), linguistic playfulness.- 8.11: a lot about grammar here too. the two problems are __gender__ and the __subject/predicate__ relationship.- 8.16: why does the poet constantly refer to pagan deities?- 8.17: the _boethian contrast_ (and ambiguity) between poetry (deceiving) and philosophy (enlightening) is here posed again; the conclusion is that poetry has to be _read wisely_, beyond the coating of literal meaning ("in superficiali litterae cortice")- 8.26: the book is extremely conscious of its style - "rebus de quibus loquimur cognatos oportet esset sermones."	- the crucial question being, eventually, __is language ever natural?__ language seems here to inhabit | to possess | to hold a position that is found between the harmonious cosmos of nature and the potential, persistent threat of its _perversion_. just as human nature, language is a sign of order that can become a sign of _disruption_/_destruction_.- 8.28: the order of creation. God as artist, poet, and ruler (politician, legislator, pricnce); demiurge.- 8.29: "volens ut nascendi occidendique mutuae relationis circuitu per instabilitatem stabilitas, per finem infinitas, per temporalitatem aeternitas rebus occiduis donaretur." God introduces __death__; God brings _death_ and __therefore sex__ to the world.- 8.30: Nature is _sex and death_; she is generative procreation.- Met. 9: a description of cupid. love as an _oxymoron_ - as the definitive oxymoron. "naufragium dulce." a long sequence of oxymora (oxymorons?); love is the trope. the perverter of language. He acts "per antiphrasim miracula" (l. 21). Linguistic subverter of laws.- 10.1: "learning the art of cupid - from the book of experience" ("cupidinariae artis | per librum vero experientiae")	- love (cupidus) is acceptable in moderation, dangerous in excess. _laws_ vs. _custom_.- 10.3: nature teaches love (venus) the _laws of grammar_, as the rules to which generation should be submitted.- 10.4: the tone of the description becomes suddenly very __abstract__, almost intangible. Nature seems to be using grammar as a way of prescribing sexuality; sexuality has rules that are expressed in grammatical terms. __grammar__, by itself, offers no insight about the ways in which sexuality ought to work. - 10.5: the comparison to "_suppositiones appositionesque_" is almost obscure.- 10.6: sex is __only transitive__; but language allows for more than that: reflexive, intransitive. what do we do with that?- 10.7: venus is armed with the weapons of _grammar_, _logic_, and _rhetoric_. these very weapons allow her to discern between two terms (_duorum terminorum contenta compendio_) - "maior extremitas predicationis fungeretur officio, minor vero subiciendi legibus teneretur." the intercourse has to be as true and as deep as the contact between _predicate and subject_.- 10.9: the excess in rhetoric and trope causes a dangerous confusion - therefore, this excess itself is a __vice__ - "in facinus facetia, in rusticitatem urbanitas, tropus in vicium."- 10.12: the birth of "_iocus_" (joker), out of the excesses of venus. jocus is __mockery__ of what is respectful and sacred in the bonds of sexuality and marriage.- 10.16: nature has given the listener/writer a metaphorical scythe and shield, by which he could protect himself from the dangers of vices and excesses.- met. 11: _the end of beauty and virtue_, by the hands of excess and vice (_mourning_, complaint; sung by Nature).- 11.47-48: "degener ergo | bruti degenerens induit actus et sic exhominans exhominandus." - "unmanning himself, and worthy to be unmanned."- 12.1: this seems to be achapter about different vices.- 12.2: there's therefore an element of this exploration that is dependent on __confession manuals__. a _taxonomy of sin_.- 12.3: from _gluttony_ into "_bacchilatry_"; the text always relies heavily on pagan imagery and narratives, and it is curiously devoid of references to the christian system of beliefs (like boethius).- 12.4-6: this is a strangely colorful - vivid - section: linguistically creative, complex - extremely complex - in its syntax and imagery. a truly _drunken_ form.- 12.7-9: the description of sins adopts the customary progression: from drunkenness, to gluttony, to lechery.- 12.9: the subjective vices described so far became the seeds of a _wider social deisease_. excess becomes disorder.- 12.10: _avarice_ (here we have moved beyond the body); again, abundant use of _classical figures_.- 12.11-12: here nature laments the persuasive, ubiquitous power of money.- 12.13-14: conventional praise of wisdom (against the predominance of money).- met. 13: about the dangers of avarice and the sins caused by money; this whole section seems generally less original - more conventional.- 14: about arrogance. this is __pride__, in an interesting final position.- 14.3: here we fidn a delightful description of arrogant people: it mixes outward appearance and inner feeling. body, appearance - and, on the other hand, the inner voice controlling them.- 14.4-5: the transition to __envy__ is justified logically (argumentatively): envy is the concealed _cause_ of pride, and at the same time its offspring.	- notice the anaphora of _haec_ and _hic_ here. AdL is always formally very colorful - emphatic and thoughtful in his choices.- 14.7: again, anaphora as the leading device. here it produces an idea of persuasive and repetitive custom. - __14.13__: Here is an invective against __flattering__ poets. __Langland__ has either read this directly, or read something very similar.- __14.14__: the __mind__ as a "little city": "contra furiales istorum vitiorum exercitus meae mentis roborares oppidulum."- __Met. 15__: a series of instructions aimed at resisting __sin__. Instructions about __moderation__, resistance; short lines, fast pace. This book is also a __manual__ of different __poetic metres__ (and genres).- __16.1__: the appearance of a __mysterious old man__ - actually, a man who shifts from __age__ to __age__ - now young, now __mature__, now old; his __measure__ is constantly changing as well.- __16.2__: colorful description of the man's __masculinity__, __soberness__, and haircut.- __16.5__: the man is revealed as being __Hymen__. He's the quintessential __heterosexual man__>- __16.7__: appearance of a __second new character__: a beautiful woman; again, a detailed description of her beauty (__chaste__, less sexualized than Hymen's).- __16.9__: The name of the woman is revealed as being __chastity__. The scene is that of a __marriage__.- __16.12__: A new character enters the scene: __temperance__.- __16.15__: A new character enters the scene: __Generosity__. The whole sequence mirrors asnd reverts the __vice__ procession.- __16.20__: Here __Nature__ starts addressing the bystanding allegorical figures (personifications), and she reiterates the core of her complaint, __man__ has abandoned their ways- __16.25__: Nature is again seen _writing_; she is in fact writing a __letter__ addressed to her __helper__, _Genius_, her "second self."- __Met. 17__: the __song__ played by the _musicians_ attending the ceremony; this is a _song_ about __music itself__, about the __making of harmony__. It describes the way that each instrument enters the piece, and begins to play. It is the song _about_ the most harmonious song.- __18.1__: This seems to have become a __collective complaint__, in which all __virtues__ attending the ceremony participate.- __18.6__: here __Genius__ eventually appears - he is an old, _venerable man_, his head was white, but his face had no wrinkles.- __18.7__: Here we find an incredible description of Genius's everchanging clothes; he holds a piece of __parchment__ and a __pen__. The _parchment_ is described as "morticini pellae novaculae." Through __writing__ he creates __life__ on the dead skin.- __18.8-9__: A colorful description of this __writing__ - mysterious and suggestive. Sin is described as a __corruption__ of the act of writing. The left hand turns __orthography__ into limping __pseudography__ ("ab orhtographiae semita falsigraphiae claudicatione recedens").- __18.10-11__: __Falsity__ wears rags stitched together; __truth__ wears a well fitting, beautiful dress. In this world, __form is equivalent to content__.- __18.17__: __Genius__ pronounces an _anathema_ of banishment from the __bliss of heaven__, destined to those who refuse the virtues of ordered Nature and tempered Venus.__18.20__: Conclusion: a sudden awakening. "Huius imaginariae visionis subtracto speculo, me ab extasis excitatum insompnio prior misticae apparitionis dereliquit aspectus."