#Major List: The Middle English Canon between Romance and Vision (c. 1250-1420)

- __Examiners__

	- Prof. Susan Crane

	- Prof. Eleanor Johnson

##Rationale - General

My primary intention while preparing this list has been to gain a more comprehensive understanding of what we currently regard as the Middle English canon. In order to consider the titles that constitute this canon in their original literary context, with a special focus on the changes occurring during the thirteenth and fourteenth century, I have have ordered them chronologically, emphasizing, when possible, the ways that they paralleled or even influenced each other. Moreover, I have attempted to include those titles that, in my opinion, I will be most likely to teach in the future. In shaping this canonical list, therefore, I have chosen works that are still frequently read and studied, either because they are widely regarded as influential examples in the period, or because they are still appreciated as outstanding pieces of literature today. Following this principle, I have included both texts that we ascribe to anonymous or disputed writers, like _Sir Orfeo_, _The Cloud of Unknowing_, _Pearl_ and _Sir Gawain_, and those whose authors we recognize as prominently identifiable literary figures, like Julian of Norwich or Geoffrey Chaucer. However, because this is meant to be an inclusive but not an exhaustive list, I have also decided to frame it around two broad literary categories that are often associated with the definition and the study of medieval literature in Middle English: the genre of "romance" and the tradition of "vision." Because the combination of these two terms, generally but not exclusively corresponding to the contrast between secular and religious writing, covers an extensive, malleable, and often overlapping body of forms and contents, this canon has been organized as a tentative answer to a preliminary set of questions.

##Rationale - Romance

In the case of the "romance" section of the list, these questions, regarding language, chronology, and the very literary principles that define the category, emerge even before the establishment of Middle English literature. In her chapter on the insular histoy of romance, Rosalind Field explains how this adaptable genre first developed in England after the Norman conquest, as a form of programmatic assimilation of foreign sources, mostly for entertainment, and in order to emulate the preexisting Anglo-Saxon tradition of vernacular writing. The emergence of romance presupposed the participation of bilingual or even trilingual writers, who adapted and translated, mostly from Latin and French, narratives of different kinds from the continent. As secular literature expanded during the twelfth and the thirteenth century, in many cases multiple insular translations of the same story have survived. To acknowledge this multilingual origin, and to assess some of the potential differences and similarities between some of these adaptations, in my list I have included both the Anglo-Norman and the Middle English versions of romances like _Amis and Amiloun_ and _King Horn_. Besides the connotations of their double background, linguistic and possibly social, these two works exemplify the scope of contents and forms encompassed by the genre. Composed in octosyllabic couplets first (Anglo-Norman), and in tail-rhyme stanzas later (Middle English), _Amis and Amiloun_ tells a story of friendship, sin, and miraculous redemption, set in Northern Italy; on the other hand, _King Horn_ focuses on a distinctly British warrior and ruler, whose epic battles, fought against imaginary pagan invaders, are first recounted in an unusual rhyming _laisse_ (Anglo-Norman), reminiscent of the Old French chansons de geste, and then rendered in short, heavily stressed couplets (Middle English). For this list I have therefore chosen texts that could represent the several facets of this stylistic and thematic heterogeneity, including explorations of courtly love (Thomas' _Tristran_ and the Middle English _Sir Tristrem_), fictions of exotic journeys and magical artifacts (_Floris and Blancheflour_), exemplary accounts of regal virtue, either political (_Havelok the Dane_) or spiritual (_Stanzaic Guy of Warwick_), and a late, alliterative retelling of Arthurian matter (_The Alliterative Morte Arthure_). I have also selected works that might have influenced, or perhaps have been influenced by, the diverse manifestations of this inclusive genre, such as the _Lais_ of Marie de France, Chaucer's _Troilus and Criseyde_, and Lydgate's _Troy Book_. Finally, the list also contains those fragments from Chaucer's _The Canterbury Tales_ where we find adaptations or imitations of romance (_The Knight's Tale_, _The Wife of Bath's Tale_, _The Merchant's Tale_, _The Squire's Tale_, and _Sir Thopas_); the diversity of these authorial approaches, either respectful or irreverent, serves as a testament to the concurrent endurance and elusivity of the genre.

##Rationale - Vision

With few exceptions, the works the constitute the section on "vision" develop and complicate a more recognizable literary tradition, often simultaneously characterized by the presence of a dreaming or seemingly dreaming narrator in their content, and by a combination of prose and verse (_prosimetrum_) in their form. Both medieval and contemporary readers have regarded Boethius' _De Consolatione Philosophiae_, which I have chosen as the first title on my list, as a seminal text in this tradition. To better comprehend its impact on later comparable writings, especially in Middle English, I have added a series of continental works from the twelfth and thirteenth century, which exemplify how writers aspired to follow Boethius' model while experimenting with new literary notions and practices. These are Alain de Lille's _De Planctu Naturae_, Guillaume de Lorris and Jean de Meun's _Roman de la Rose_, and Dante's _Vita Nuova_. The core of my list, however, focuses on the second half of the fourteenth century, when English writers began deploying the convention of the dreaming narrator for new purposes. Some, like the anonymous author of _Wynnere and Wastoure_, transformed the allegorical personifications that had characterized the tradition into identifiable social types. This change enabled personifications to be interpreted not as abstractions but as synecdoches, that is, as representatives of contrasting socioeconomic groups, thus allowing writers to resort to the dream setting as a frame for political speculations, analyses, or critiques. This publicly engaged  Other authors, like the _Pearl_ poet, experimented both with the hermeneutic flexibility of personifications, deploying deliberately ambiguous, or shifting, allegorical referents, and with innovative poetic forms, like the elaborate and suggestively circular stanza of _Pearl_. In these cases the context and the objective of the dream pertain to the domain of theological contemplation, rather than being a justification for an unconstrained social commentary. As a consequence, the tradition of "vision" approximates the mystical _Shewings_ of Julian of Norwich, who similarly combined linguistic and religious meditation, and the cycle of the _York Corpus Christi Plays_, where theology and history blend with a rich variety of experiments in meter, stanza, and performance. In my list these two works complement _The Cloud of Unknowing_ as vernacular models of formal experimentation in religious writing.
