#De Planctu Naturae##From the introduction (by Wintrhop Wetherbee)###Author- Born at Lille (Northern France), around 1120;- __Doctor universalis__ of the _liberal arts_ (__7__) - between the Loire valley and Chartres (centre France)- Taught in Paris, spent time in Provence (never left France, apparently);- His epitaph: 	- _Alanum breuis hora breui tumulo sepeliuit | Qui duo, qui septem, qui totum scibile sciuit._ (__duo__: the _Testaments_; __septem__: the _artes_);- According to this preface, he was __Perhaps the most important Latin poet of his day_- -- an innovative theologian and one of the founders of systematic theology --- -- an apologist who attacked the Cathars and Waldensians and defended Christianity against Jews and Muslims -- (this guy is terrible)- the author of a __treatise on preaching__ and a __manual for confessors__ that are __among the first of their kind__ (this is important business)- his diverse writing are __unified by a theologian's concern with the relations between nature and the divine and with the problem of expressing these relations in language__;- _the intellectual was emerging as a social type_;- a universe that was essentially that of Plato's _Timaeus_, as interpreted by Calcidius, Macrobius, and the anonymous author of the Hermetic _Asclepius_;- Alan's model of the physical universe, though it reflects a sophisticated appreciation of the cosmological thought of his mentors, is in the end simple and conventional. His emphasis is on its moral and spiritual implications, and he keeps both ancient science and the Neoplatonism of the late antique interpreters of Plato at a distance.###The work- written no later than the 1160s, when Alan was perhaps teaching in one of the cathedral schools;- "survives in more than one hundred manuscripts [...] widely read throughout medieval Europe"- indebted to __Bernardus Silvestris__ and his _Cosmographia_ (wonderful title) of 1147;- "From Bernardus, and from their great common exemplars, Boethius and Martianus Capella, Alan learned to cast complex intellectual issues in literary form, and his career as a poet was largely defined by a sustained dialogue with the _Cosmographia_;- "The _De Planctu Naturae_ is closely engaged with a world where language itself and hence poetry as well have lost the power to express natural love and the values implicit in the order of nature. Poetic language conveys the effect of the corruption of human nature in the form of bizarre rhetoric, obscene puns , paradox, and ambiguity, and this crisis creates a corresponding crisis in the level of poetics." (this is a very nice and quick takeaway - breaking of form, breaking of an ethical world of values)- deeply indebted to Boethius as well.- "Its divine Nature is a largely autonomous power whose laws govern the reproduction of created life and provide a standard for social and moral order."- Alan's personified Nature is inherited from the _Cosmographia_ of Bernardus Silvestris.- "That the forces essential to human survival are capable of undermining human self-realization is the central issue in the _De Planctu Naturae_. Nature's lament is an existential counterweight to the authoritarian idealism of Boethius's Philosophy, a sad answer to Philosophy's wish that the love that orders the heavens might govern the human spirit."	- Crucial description of a __conflict__ which we should try to understand better. Sexuality seems to be a part of nature, but also one of its enemies. A natural, primitive force.- "Nature then appears, and vicious troping is replaced by a luminous prose description of the goddess and her raiment, but the tortured elegiacs of the proem have revealed a paradox that will become more obvious as the dialogue proceeds. In establishing an __equivalence__ between __rhetorical trope__ and __homoerotic act__, the Poet has implicated himself, for the linguistic _vitia_ he condemns are of his own devising, and Nature herself cannot express her concern over the condition of sinful mankind without employing them. The healthy "natural" rhetoric Nature demands is steadily displaced by what she will later call _falsigraphia_."- "That Nature's most vivid poetry should be evoked by Cupido tells us that poetry itself is now a function of a new and ambiguous power, its rhetoric and imagery generated by the manifold forms in which natural love manifests itself."###Commentary1. __1__: Prosimetrum; the function of poetry is that of displaying the perfect order of nature; and that of creating a sort of objective, perfectly crafted beauty that can arouse desire in the reader.1. __1__-__60__: The striking quality of the first _metrum_ is that of closely associating _grammar_ and _order_. The order of nature is the order of grammar.	1. The real surprise here is that _language_  - the sheer manipulation of Latin, of its categories, of its structure - is what allows for the very primordial __imagination__ of the corruption of the natural world. We have to think about this more slowly: the fact is that __grammar__ functions as a laboratory allowing for the abstract manipulation of natural forms - of natural elements. Natural elements can be mixed and made to interact in a new way - in an unreal, intangible way - as they are first translated into the categories of grammar (nouns, verbs; and gender).		- The fact that __gender__ is above all a grammatical necessity - at times completely separated from sexuality - should be constantly stressed.1. __5__-__10__: the constant figures of this _metrum_ seem to be:	1. __alliteration__ (of course; although - keep that in mind - alliteration is often also a device used to stress the artificiality of language itself - language that constructs analogy out of the arbitrariness of its economy		1. That is, the discovery of a Saussurian principle of arbitrariness - after (and against) the Etymologies of Isidore and so forth - is unsettling; new languages, the fall of Latin, produced the need and the awareness that words are conventions, that words do not mean anything.	2. the second device being __homonymy__	3. the third device being __adnomination__ (crucial)1. Let's look at __lines 7-8__:	- _Non fraus tristitiem, non fraudis fletus adulter | non dolus, immo dolor, parturit immo partuit._1. __18__: great creativity here; _hermafroditat_ is treated as a __verb__; we might say that for AdL Latin was pretty much a live language, capable of being mutated and bent according to the present purpose.1. __22__ Another great quotation	- _Ars illi non placet, immo tropus_1. __31-32__: It is, perhaps, possible to get the impression that there is an ideal of poetry - and nature - that does not offend AdL's sensibility - a positive model that has been lost. "Thus the dactylic practice of Venus becomes a crude iambic, in which the long syllable does not accept the short."	- It would be interesting to understand whether AdL is referring to a specific change in poetical practice; nevertheless, it is important to remark how perversion is _at the same time_ the __intrinsic__ danger of poetry and a more general __perversion__ of poetry - that is, poetry is said to be generally bad, and then capable of being perverted (therefore, originally not that bad).1. __43__ - _Virginis in labiis cur basia tanta quiescunt, cum reditus in eis sumere nemo velit?_ - Why isn't anyone kissing this beautiful woman, the beautiful woman being __Nature__ but also __every woman__? __Production of desire__. Positive sensuality; sensuality triggered by form; sensuality assisted by poetry.1. __55__ - Some Ovidian myths here; AdL complains the disappearance of heterosexual desire - the same desire that can become dangerous for whom follows it.1. __prose 2__ - the leading idea is, of course, that of __order__.	- Then there is the whole aspect of desire; the presence of __Nature__, her description, the articulation of the various parts of her body in the first prose, is an attempt at eliciting an authentic desire in the reader.	- A beautiful human body - a beautiful female human body1. __p2.5__: look at the way in which the description of the body shifts to a description of the __crown__; so - female body (face, arms, waist, sex); then her character (animation; the tears - that is, her inner activity, her psychology), and finally the crown on her head, becoming the astral world - and allowing her to work as a metaphor for the cosmos;	- More could be said about this transition; the microcosm is the female body - her breasts like apples (analogy, simile, becoming already a form of extension towards the rest of the world), the __cosm__ is her head, is a second detail - the __macrocosm__ follows the __microcosm__ and is contained within it; also notice how the transition between the __microcosm__ and the __macrocosm__ is marked by the psychological annotation - that is, by the observation of her sad character.	- at this point (p.__2.8__) the description __clearly__ becomes an __allegory__.1. __p.2.10-11__: The __ekphrasis__ seem to theorize the relationship between __language__ and __nature__ on a principle of constant analogy - of constant mirroring; in a way, then, nature __is__ like language; nature should not be distinguished from language.1. __p.2.12__: in a way, the game is here complex, articulate, skillful - it aligns __macrocosm__ and __microcosm__ through the means of artistic reproduction - the __planets__ are signified by the __stones__ by the means of _art_ itself; _art_ becomes a way to turn _ekphrasis_ into _allegory_.1. the impression is that Latin is used as a way of conveying __order__ in the _proses_, and __ambiguity__ in the _metra_ (__p.2.19__);1. notice how the sequence of transitions really seem to create the sensation of an optical illusion, of a trompe d'oeil, or of a mise en abyme (pick one - each is appropriate somehow) (__p.2.19__) - we are moving from the crown, to the dress, to the __dreamlike effect of art__ depicted on it, and containing _a council of the creatures of the air.	- The text is, of course, about the regulation of heterosexual love; heterosexual and monogamous love. The parts regarding __animals__ and their behavior could be easily associated to the observation of animal sexuality in Ovid, and to the allegorical understanding of natural life in bestiaries (after the _Physiologus_).- Prescribing desire.- - -- - -- __14.13__: Here is an invective against __flattering__ poets. __Langland__ has either read this directly, or read something very similar.- __14.14__: the __mind__ as a "little city": "contra furiales istorum vitiorum exercitus meae mentis roborares oppidulum."- __Met. 15__: a series of instructions aimed at resisting __sin__. Instructions about __moderation__, resistance; short lines, fast pace. This book is also a __manual__ of different __poetic metres__ (and genres).- __16.1__: the appearance of a __mysterious old man__ - actually, a man who shifts from __age__ to __age__ - now young, now __mature__, now old; his __measure__ is constantly changing as well.- __16.2__: colorful description of the man's __masculinity__, __soberness__, and haircut.- __16.5__: the man is revealed as being __Hymen__. He's the quintessential __heterosexual man__>- __16.7__: appearance of a __second new character__: a beautiful woman; again, a detailed description of her beauty (__chaste__, less sexualized than Hymen's).- __16.9__: The name of the woman is revealed as being __chastity__. The scene is that of a __marriage__.- __16.12__: A new character enters the scene: __temperance__.- __16.15__: A new character enters the scene: __Generosity__. The whole sequence mirrors asnd reverts the __vice__ procession.- __16.20__: Here __Nature__ starts addressing the bystanding allegorical figures (personifications), and she reiterates the core of her complaint, __man__ has abandoned their ways- __16.25__: Nature is again seen _writing_; she is in fact writing a __letter__ addressed to her __helper__, _Genius_, her "second self."- __Met. 17__: the __song__ played by the _musicians_ attending the ceremony; this is a _song_ about __music itself__, about the __making of harmony__. It describes the way that each instrument enters the piece, and begins to play. It is the song _about_ the most harmonious song.- __18.1__: This seems to have become a __collective complaint__, in which all __virtues__ attending the ceremony participate.- __18.6__: here __Genius__ eventually appears - he is an old, _venerable man_, his head was white, but his face had no wrinkles.- __18.7__: Here we find an incredible description of Genius's everchanging clothes; he holds a piece of __parchment__ and a __pen__. The _parchment_ is described as "morticini pellae novaculae." Through __writing__ he creates __life__ on the dead skin.- __18.8-9__: A colorful description of this __writing__ - mysterious and suggestive. Sin is described as a __corruption__ of the act of writing. The left hand turns __orthography__ into limping __pseudography__ ("ab orhtographiae semita falsigraphiae claudicatione recedens").- __18.10-11__: __Falsity__ wears rags stitched together; __truth__ wears a well fitting, beautiful dress. In this world, __form is equivalent to content__.- __18.17__: __Genius__ pronounces an _anathema_ of banishment from the __bliss of heaven__, destined to those who refuse the virtues of ordered Nature and tempered Venus.__18.20__: Conclusion: a sudden awakening. "Huius imaginariae visionis subtracto speculo, me ab extasis excitatum insompnio prior misticae apparitionis dereliquit aspectus."