---
title: "Rationale for Minor List #2"
date: May 2016
author: G. E. Saretto
---

# Minor List: Continental Allegory

- __Examiner__: Prof. Jesús Rodríguez Velasco

In this list I have sought to include several complementary perspectives on the literary concept of allegory. I have tentatively defined "allegory" as a device both creative and interpretive. On the one hand, medieval writers often conceived their own texts as allegorical works. Therefore, they systematically trasferred their actual intentions and thoughts from the literal to the figurative level of meaning, and they prompted their readers, more or less directly, to seek this concealed structure of senses, whose uncovering was necessary to fully understand and appreciate the work as a whole. On the other, medieval exegetes deployed allegory as a hermeneutic tool, applied to preexisting works from the classical and the Christian tradition. This method allowed them to disregard ostensible contradictions and scientific or theological inaccuracies, which could be regarded as superficial features that affected only the literal sense, and to focus instead on the indisputable truths concealed in figurative readings of the Scripture, or on the valuable teachings hidden beyond Ovid's and Virgil's false beliefs. This list therefore investigates how medieval writers and readers approached, developed and at times complicated these two uses of allegory. Besides, to complement the chronological and geographical scope of the other two lists, for this investigation I have decided to focus on Latin and vernacular texts written on the Continent and occasionally along its frontiers, and especially texts written before and after the fourteenth century. Moreover, I have chosen to favor heterogeneity over coherence, with the intention of comprehending the diverse products of these two allegorical practices, rather than the stability of the tradition that encompassed them. The list includes fictional narratives that require, describe or impose processes of allegorical reading, like the two works by Chrétien de Troyes, the later examples from the _Lancelot-Graal_ cycle, the educational works by Christine de Pizan, and Alfonso de Palencia's _Batalla Campal_. Fiction is replaced by history in poetic accounts of miracles, like those by Gonzalo de Berceo and Alfonso X, where the revelation of meaning, produced by an allegorical interpretation, corresponds to the experience of a divine intervention in history, produced by the very recognition of miracles. Similarly, the mystical works written by Teresa de Cartagena contain a comparable experience of the divine, although in her visions allegory is displaced from the interpretation of historical events to that of her own ill body. Similarly stressing sensory experiences, in his _Ring of the Dove_, Ibn Hazm deploys allegory as a cognitive and speculative instrument, through which he can transform a treatise about love into a theological meditation on the presence of God in the cosmos. The other primary texts in the list exemplify the several approaches that corresponded to the exegetical function of allegory. While Hugh of Saint Victor instructed his readers to thoroughly consider the literal interpretation of a text, before attempting to formulate a figurative one, Maimonides discouraged academics from reading the Scripture literally, and proposed a reconciliation between theology and philosophy based almost excusively on allegorical exegesis. These hermeneutical practices culminated in the extensive commentaries on classical works written in the fifteenth century, which became almost independent from their source. Those by Alfonso de San Cristóbal and Enrique de Villena, for instance, supplant the original text almost entirely. Finally, the secondary readings expand the applications of allegory even further, by considering not only adjacent literary devices (Auerbach, de Lubac, Minnis), but also equivalent practices in figurative art (Kumler, Nirenberg) and in legal discourse (Thomas, Velasco).
