#The Alliterative Morte Arthure

|Date|Form|Key-words|
|:---:|:---:|:---:|
|c. 1400|Alliterative long line|Epic; Nationalism; Hagiography; Foreignness; Vassalage; Dream; Interpretation|

#Introduction

- apparently __more complex__ than its stanzaic counterpart; it survives in __one ms__ from about 1440; the original is probably from the __east midlands__; this ms. is from the __west midlands__.

- another fine example of the "__alliterative revival__"; perhaps only second to the sggk ms; it is, apparently, a strongly __militarized__ version of the last year of arthur's life, from 1400.

##Comment

78. the opening is explicitly __religious__ - a prayer to god, asking for a guide on __how to live virtuously__ and die in his __grace__ [__pedagogy and religious content__; the strongly historical narrative is treated like a hagiography, a model for proper behavior.] this religious and ethical premise becomes a story about worthy knights. the topic is __arthur's conquest of rome__ [fulfilment of fantasy; that is probably another important feature of the genre]; first the poet describes the vast __topography__ of his insular and european domains. he disposes how his land should be administered, and then leaves for britain the brodder" [great britain], to hunt and live in solace [this is another nationalistic, archaizing arthurian fantasy, possibly like the one of sggk; national territory, alliterative language, combination of insular devotion and continental history and narrative matter].

287. the chronology seems to follow the pattern of sggk - from christmas to new year's eve; the unexpected visitor, however, is not an exotic knight but a roman ambassador, come to threaten arhtur's court and to ask for a __tribute__, in exchange for his __insubordination__ and his many conquests; arthur is, however, more __intimidating__, even __feral__ in his looks. but he acts justly, and stresses that he will __listen to the advice__ of wise men [he is the model of a good sovereign], and accomodate the ambassadors; follows a detailed description of a __sumptuous meal__, including the golden vessels capable of detecting poison. arthur's epiteth is "the __conqueror__"; his "__prise metes__" are praised by all - the romans especially (already a __triumph__, although just cultural; _interestingly, it is a cultural triumph that coincides with a culinary exchange; food is the ambassador for the worth of the entire country_). the council follows; a nobleman recommends __war__ - glad that they can stop their __source__, and returns to war. arthur reminds everyone that he is the legitimate heir of rome, and that, therefore, they owe him.

478. the noblemen reunited in the council share memories of roman abuse on their land; they offer __men__ and support from their own lands (islands and brittany); the plan is to attack northern italy. the knights of the round table all swear revenge (gawain, lancelot; _strangely, they all swear on the "vernacle," the veronica; formula on specifically english obsession?_]. the __topography__ of the continent is as precise as that of the island; arthrur delivers his threat to the ambassadors; then he explains in very fine detail the __route__ that the ambassadors should take to leave the country; he has been hospitable, but now he describes in precise detail the __boundaries of his hospitality__ [__geography of margins__].

678. we follow the ambassadors as they cross this foreign geography; they present their message to the __roman emperor__; they praise arthur, and deliver the full impact of his threat; to this the emperor lucius responds with an even more resolute plan to attach; he sends out letters to __summon more__ forces from across the empire. the topography [this is, apparently, an intensely __geographical poem__] now extends to the east; supernatural warriors - giants and witches - join his army, together with "__sarazens__"; arthur, in the meanwhile, gathers his forces and appoints a __steward__ to rule in the land, "sir mordred." he entrusts his kingdom and his wife to him; similiarities with __sir orfeo__ [the epic therefore emphasizes traditional elements also found in the middle english romance, such as the faithful - or unfaithful - steward].

879. the __election of the lieutenant__ is emphasized more, publicly and privately (with guineviere); the journey to the continent (eastward) is followed by an ominous dream - a __dragon__; the preparations are described in detail, and __lexically rich__; the navigation itself is ominous and dark - a __nocturnal__, almost __funereal__ departure. the dream is wonderful and full of colors, with two giant creatures fighting across the landscape - the __dragon__ and the __bear__ (reminisciences of havelok as a giant), who is violently killed. the dream is __interpreted__ by two philosophers, still on the boat, as a __triumph for arthur__, who stands for the dragon. as they reach the shores of normandy, a messenger informs them that a giant - an enemy - is devouring people and children, and has kidnapped the "duchess of bretain." arthur shares the grief.

1073. arthur declares his intention to face the giant; he is told about his dwelling [this is the text where the interaction between characters, ideas, and __landscape__ is most emphasized, a specifically historical landscape, rooted in actual geographical knowledge]. arthur wears his armor, and prepares for the battle [more __lexical richness__; the poetical taste driving this work is decidedly similar to that of __sggk__]; his armor is full of gold, silver and gems; then he rides with his knights to an elaborate locus amoenus, rich of fauna and flora where they seek a saint; arthur explores the place by himself; he meets a "very woful widow," standing by a fire, who warns him of the __danger__ awaiting, retelling the story of the brutally slain duchess. the giant is described as irreducible to cultural and political norms; he is the __embodiment of otherness__ [like __fairies__ for h. cooper]; he shares some traits of wilderness and feral existence with the green knight. he wants __arthur's beard__ - nothing else (he has a gown bordered with beards of kings); arthur finds him at his table, while he is dining on children's corpses; he verbally attacks him, cursing his soul; a warrior of christianity.

1278. the giant is described as a "__gluton__"; he is monstruous and hairy [nothing in common with the fairness of the g; this description contrasts starkly with that]; he is also very __fat__; the battle is quick and __brutally grotesque__ - the giant __fails__, and arthur''s first blow hits; the second cuts through the giant's in-mete "just to the genitals" [a grossly corporal fight; the monster is just belly and genitals]. as they fight, the two fall from the cliff, and for a moment arthur's knights think that he's lost; having reassured them, arthur disposes that the giant's corpse should be displayed; then he announces his victory to the ruler of that land, attributing it to a miracle dispensed by "__god__" and "_his moder_"; he disposes that the treasure should be given to the poor, and that a church should be built on that site. they depart "toward castle blank"; on their way they are found by two french messengers, who inform them abiout the arrival of the roman emperor's troops, but 
