#The Alliterative Morte Arthure

|Date|Form|Key-words|
|:---:|:---:|:---:|
|c. 1400|Alliterative long line|Epic; Nationalism; Hagiography; Foreignness; Vassalage; Dream; Interpretation; Crusades; Speech; Translation; Exile and return|

##Ideas

- Foreigness is __southern__ first, __eastern__ later; _translation_ is the translatio _imperii et studii_.

##Introduction

- apparently __more complex__ than its stanzaic counterpart; it survives in __one ms__ from about 1440; the original is probably from the __east midlands__; this ms. is from the __west midlands__.

- another fine example of the "__alliterative revival__"; perhaps only second to the sggk ms; it is, apparently, a strongly __militarized__ version of the last year of arthur's life, from 1400.

##Comment

78. the opening is explicitly __religious__ - a prayer to god, asking for a guide on __how to live virtuously__ and die in his __grace__ [__pedagogy and religious content__; the strongly historical narrative is treated like a hagiography, a model for proper behavior.] this religious and ethical premise becomes a story about worthy knights. the topic is __arthur's conquest of rome__ [fulfilment of fantasy; that is probably another important feature of the genre]; first the poet describes the vast __topography__ of his insular and european domains. he disposes how his land should be administered, and then leaves for britain the brodder" [great britain], to hunt and live in solace [this is another nationalistic, archaizing arthurian fantasy, possibly like the one of sggk; national territory, alliterative language, combination of insular devotion and continental history and narrative matter].

287. the chronology seems to follow the pattern of sggk - from christmas to new year's eve; the unexpected visitor, however, is not an exotic knight but a roman ambassador, come to threaten arhtur's court and to ask for a __tribute__, in exchange for his __insubordination__ and his many conquests; arthur is, however, more __intimidating__, even __feral__ in his looks. but he acts justly, and stresses that he will __listen to the advice__ of wise men [he is the model of a good sovereign], and accomodate the ambassadors; follows a detailed description of a __sumptuous meal__, including the golden vessels capable of detecting poison. arthur's epiteth is "the __conqueror__"; his "__prise metes__" are praised by all - the romans especially (already a __triumph__, although just cultural; _interestingly, it is a cultural triumph that coincides with a culinary exchange; food is the ambassador for the worth of the entire country_). the council follows; a nobleman recommends __war__ - glad that they can stop their __source__, and returns to war. arthur reminds everyone that he is the legitimate heir of rome, and that, therefore, they owe him.

478. the noblemen reunited in the council share memories of roman abuse on their land; they offer __men__ and support from their own lands (islands and brittany); the plan is to attack northern italy. the knights of the round table all swear revenge (gawain, lancelot; _strangely, they all swear on the "vernacle," the veronica; formula on specifically english obsession?_]. the __topography__ of the continent is as precise as that of the island; arthrur delivers his threat to the ambassadors; then he explains in very fine detail the __route__ that the ambassadors should take to leave the country; he has been hospitable, but now he describes in precise detail the __boundaries of his hospitality__ [__geography of margins__].

678. we follow the ambassadors as they cross this foreign geography; they present their message to the __roman emperor__; they praise arthur, and deliver the full impact of his threat; to this the emperor lucius responds with an even more resolute plan to attach; he sends out letters to __summon more__ forces from across the empire. the topography [this is, apparently, an intensely __geographical poem__] now extends to the east; supernatural warriors - giants and witches - join his army, together with "__sarazens__"; arthur, in the meanwhile, gathers his forces and appoints a __steward__ to rule in the land, "sir mordred." he entrusts his kingdom and his wife to him; similiarities with __sir orfeo__ [the epic therefore emphasizes traditional elements also found in the middle english romance, such as the faithful - or unfaithful - steward].

879. the __election of the lieutenant__ is emphasized more, publicly and privately (with guineviere); the journey to the continent (eastward) is followed by an ominous dream - a __dragon__; the preparations are described in detail, and __lexically rich__; the navigation itself is ominous and dark - a __nocturnal__, almost __funereal__ departure. the dream is wonderful and full of colors, with two giant creatures fighting across the landscape - the __dragon__ and the __bear__ (reminisciences of havelok as a giant), who is violently killed. the dream is __interpreted__ by two philosophers, still on the boat, as a __triumph for arthur__, who stands for the dragon. as they reach the shores of normandy, a messenger informs them that a giant - an enemy - is devouring people and children, and has kidnapped the "duchess of bretain." arthur shares the grief.

1073. arthur declares his intention to face the giant; he is told about his dwelling [this is the text where the interaction between characters, ideas, and __landscape__ is most emphasized, a specifically historical landscape, rooted in actual geographical knowledge]. arthur wears his armor, and prepares for the battle [more __lexical richness__; the poetical taste driving this work is decidedly similar to that of __sggk__]; his armor is full of gold, silver and gems; then he rides with his knights to an elaborate locus amoenus, rich of fauna and flora where they seek a saint; arthur explores the place by himself; he meets a "very woful widow," standing by a fire, who warns him of the __danger__ awaiting, retelling the story of the brutally slain duchess. the giant is described as irreducible to cultural and political norms; he is the __embodiment of otherness__ [like __fairies__ for h. cooper]; he shares some traits of wilderness and feral existence with the green knight. he wants __arthur's beard__ - nothing else (he has a gown bordered with beards of kings); arthur finds him at his table, while he is dining on children's corpses; he verbally attacks him, cursing his soul; a warrior of christianity.

1278. the giant is described as a "__gluton__"; he is monstruous and hairy [nothing in common with the fairness of the g; this description contrasts starkly with that]; he is also very __fat__; the battle is quick and __brutally grotesque__ - the giant __fails__, and arthur''s first blow hits; the second cuts through the giant's in-mete "just to the genitals" [a grossly corporal fight; the monster is just belly and genitals]. as they fight, the two fall from the cliff, and for a moment arthur's knights think that he's lost; having reassured them, arthur disposes that the giant's corpse should be displayed; then he announces his victory to the ruler of that land, attributing it to a miracle dispensed by "__god__" and "_his moder_"; he disposes that the treasure should be given to the poor, and that a church should be built on that site. they depart "toward castle blank"; on their way they are found by two french messengers, who inform them about the arrival of the roman emperor's troops, plundering the land. arthur sends his knights to the emperor, to ask for a diplomatic meeting. war will ensue otherwise. roman __invaders__.

1483. a __different__ setting; the continent is covered by rich palaces and human marvels; they reach the emperor's dining table (sinister parallel with the giant); gawain speaks, reiterating england's claims to the empire; the emperor does not desist, and his court insults the knights as "bretons"; gawain beheads one of them, and they all leave; a knight see to chase them is immediately killed by gawain too, brutally. __violence escalates__; a roman ambush fails to repel the bretons, and more forces are sent to contrast the knights [the narrator is now using the sympathetic possessive "our" to refer to them]; they have to retire - "fled to the forest"; but gawain prompts them to return, and a new furious attack (__nationalistic fantasy__).

1670. the consequences are __catastrophic__, the roman ambassadors are caught and imprisoned [it is as if the british had been driven by __wrath__]; arthur's knight seem more a synecdoche of britail than a synecdoche for the most virtuous part of humanity. the knights retire to their court, their armors and weapons are covered in blood; gawain is mourned. arthur has to decide what will happen to the prisoners. the language used by arthur is explicitly and emphatically religious; he proclaims that he won't be covetous about the ransom for the prisoners; and he generously rewards his knights (an exemplary ruler). the knights reach the "close of clime"; on their way they find an "earl in anger," who supports the roman emperor. the romance imitates history.

1881. the two armies - and the two sides - agree to a __tournament__ to establish the right over the land and the tributes; cliges, on arthur's side, defends his position by reminding the king of syria of his noble trojan ancestors - the lineage (bloodline) that unites him to brut(us). inspired by their commanders, the bretons prepare for the battle; the two sides seem to be led by the ruler of cornwall and that of lybia; it is a holy war, the fantasy of a crusade against the empire. the bretons win again, and chase the enemy "to a castel."

2080. the aftermath is even more tragic; there are now even more dead and prisoners among the british rank, a piece of news that grieves arthur; the interaction with the comrades is now shaped by __mourning__ and __anger__ for the losses; but a __new battle__ is prepared immediately afterward. the two main opponents seem the welsh king and the viscount of rome. it is the most __violent__ and __solemn__ one (same __climax__ as _guy of warwick_); lancelot wounds the emperor.

	- [many differences with the __canonical romance__; this is a __collective__ and __historical__ genre.]

2289. [also notice how guineviere has been left alone; the point of view shifts, but only among the male warriors.] arthur kills several giants, by using excalibur; the battle becomes hyperbolically huge and bloody - every stream of the forest "of red blood runnes." the knight sir kaymous dies; arthur avenges him, after he has received the host and the absolution [history produces __death__; foreshadowing of arthur's end]. the battle is a __combination__ of collective, uncontrollable reactions, and the strength of individual agency; arthur eventually __kills the emperor__; the battle ends violently; no prisoners are spared.

2481. the british knights collect __rich__ and __exotic__ rewards; the victory is sealed by the burial of the dead and the submission of the prisoners, sent to the __roman "senatours."__ the romans are thus "rebuked for ever," and no tax tribute will ever be asked again [__manipulation of time__ is perhaps the most interesting feature of this work, between the __mortality__ of history and the transcendent atemporality of romance]; the poet emphasizes the times of the year when each episode occurs (now we are halfway through). arthur identifies a new enemy in the "lege" of "lorreine"; he is now the protector of the "pope landes" [another fiction of __predestination__; the insular crown as the roman empire, defending the christian faith]. the breton knights prepare the battle; they now fight "with crisom anointed."

2685. arthur gathers his best knights [they are a __combination__ of the mythical knights of the round table - synecdoche for virtue - and the noblemen who rule the british lands - geographical synecdoche]; he assigns a __delicate__ mission: to hunt for the game that will __feed their troops__. gawain is among them; he challenges and fights against a lorraine soldier; again he is wounded, and again he is driven by anger. the adversary then reveals his identity - sir priamus, descendent of alexander; the two bloodlines, hector's and alexander's (westward and eastward) are contrasted here. wounded, sir gawain returns to the british camp a wonder

2882. sir priamus is received as a precious prisoner by the bretons; he has with himself a vessel full of water from the springs of paradise [__exotic__ riches, from the holy lands of the __east__]; they are healed and fed [these knights __eat and drink__ because they need it; they are __historical human beings__]; a new battle ensues. the two fighters who distinguish themselves are florent and floridas, from italy (possibly?); the international war now resembles more an actual __crusade__. gawain is, again, the crucial speaker to stir the british forces.

3175. many giants join the battle; in the meanwhile, the duke priamus is betrayed by his troops of mercenaries, who complain about the lack of payments; he is now fighting for gawain; on the battlefield, a "child" warrior dies brutally; war is depicted in its realistic, least idealized traits, as a __violent__ and __dishonorable__ affair. they obtain a victory, anyway, and return to arthur's court. arthur sends his war engines [perhaps the least idealized notion of warfare conceivable; fighting with machines]. from lorreine he decides to advance towards northern italy; they conquer como. the "sire of milan" simply surrenders, paying arthur a tribute [grated?].

3468. [the geography of northern italy is very detailed.] the army is facing the __dwellers__ of the land in the xiv s.; arthur is fighting in the poem's present. he's now dealing with the cardinal and senators of italian politics [the poem has compressed temporality - from the international armies of the empire, to the crusades, to the noblemen and clergy of late medieval italy]. arthur has a new dream; he summons, again, his wise philosophers, the dream has a scary wood and a locus amoenus; a duchess richly dressed; it is an elaborate, rich __vision__; six kings present themselves; it is a __narrative vision__. the wise men interpret it as a change, in fortune, motivated by his pride; they suggest that he represents and atones for his sins; the kings were the previous conquerors - from alexander to david.

3769. arthur is now wearing the clothes of a venerable nobleman, not a warrior; he meets a pilgrim headed towards rome; the pilgrim reveals his identity - he is a breton and a relative of his. he brings tragic news about the lieutenant, now become wicked and violent, spreading destruction against the clergy and the people; and he has married guineviere, who is now "with child"; arthur immediately starts preparing for his return; he appoints some local rulers, and he sails to the land; he is dressed royally. the journey is interrupted by a violent tempest, which seems to destroy the ship; but this is only the beginning of a furious __naval battle__, against the danes. the forces of arthur's table, and gawain especially, again seem to triumph.

4071. for a moment gawain loses hope for his victory; and he promises his knights the joys of heaven; but suddenly he is possessed by a mad, furious "frensy" - pure, irrational wrath; he attacks many men, and eventually sir mordred - but this manages to kill him. mordred has a __moment of repentance__ - he knows that this murder is almost sinful. arthur and his court grieve gawain's death - it is a resounding __collective tragedy__.

	- gawain's death has a transcendent quality, like christ's passion; mordred is diabolical; and the fact that he repents - that he might dissociate himself from their act - is very __problematic__.

4346. the holy war has acquired a new dimension; arthur incites his men on the battlefield; mordred changes his heraldic devices to trick arthur; it is, again, a collective battle, won by arthur's forces. but arthur considers it a __loss__. the conclusion is swift; arthur refuses a surgeon, and calls for a confessor; he dies and he is buried.