#The Canterbury Tales - Fragment one

##Introduction

###The general prologue

- Harry Bailey's prohect as he collects tales from the pilgrims; the pilgrimage as the __idea of a pilgrimage__, a metaphor for the world [metaphysical pilgrimage? _add to this the considerations about those recurrent transitions, almost disembodied from the reality that surrounds them; a combination of cyclical and linear temporality_].

- the work is incomplete; it survives in __ten fragments__, editorial units determined by the existence of internal signs of linkage; there are no explicit connections between them.

- the general prologue was presumably written early; some characters do not appear in it [or are not fully described] (the second nun, the nun's priest). much of the opening seems reminiscent of the __dream vision tradition__ (romaunt de la rose). combination of __synecdoche__ (type) and __individual__ [consider, of course, the procession of sins in langland, but also pieces like _wynnere and wastoure; is this meditation on synecdoche against realism a specifically english trait?_].

###The knight's tale

- written before the project of c. t. began; it is a free adaptation of boccaccio's teseida; compared to the source, this version is __compressed__ from __epic__ to __romance__ [the first being martial and longer; the second courtly - romantic - and shorter]; besides, like for _troilus and criseyde_, chaucer added references to boethius [and maybe dante].

- according to this editor, the main motive of romance is __idealization__, not realism; it is a sequence of __unjustified__ events occurring to poorly developed characters [therefore, as prof. crane remarked, the miller's tale works well as an answer to it because it emphasizes human agency against the unfathomable forces of fortune; things do not just happen in the miller's tale - things are consequences of human actions, which however interact surprisingly, unexpectedly; compare the "water, water" there with the apparition of the furies here].

###The miller's prologue and tale

- this tale, like the ones which follow, is a fabliau, a genre that flourished in france in the xiii s.; it is a "delightfully subversive" genre which praises those whom "society usually scorns" and chastises "those whom society respects." chaucer elaborates the __form__ and the __plot__ [he seems to have deliberately combined two different plots - the "misdirected kiss" and the "second flood trick"; think about how chaucer's preliminary choices - translation, expansion, adaptation and, finally, combination - mirror his ideological decisions; here the very idea of combining two preexisting plots seems aimed at responding to the knight's considerations about providence, now reduced to cause and effect] it also uses the tale to carefully match and contrast the one told by the knight.

###The reeve's tale

- probably based on a pre-existing french fabliau; it is a darker, more realistic tale.

	- it is also a funny tale; it is fast-paced and full of action [true; the descriptions are short and somber compared to the ones in the miller's tale, and the characters speak less].

###The cook's tale

- the lowest point of the progression, more and more realistic [it is a cook, mind]; close to london.

##Comment

###The general prologue

42. the wish to leave and go on pilgrimages is as spontaneous as the rest of the __natural phenomena__ described by ch. in the opening. the first few lines match the opening of __dream visions__ like piers plowman; but they are also rooted in earthly journeys, in foreign and exotic lands, like the romances [that is what ch. does at the beginning; spring prompts everybody to travel to distant lands, but he will focus on those who travel in his own country; think about _the house of fame_ as a shift from abstract literary forms to the voices of the city]. ch. - the pilgrim - befriends every character quickly, then presents them all [and chaucer is like one of the characters of his own romances, or perhaps he could be - like the knight in the _wife of bath's tale_, he is travelling to gain knowledge, through experience].

269. the knight seems a __literary creature__, drawn straight from the __romance tradition__; his history draws the sort of __exotic geography__ found in the genre [cfr. _guy of warwick_ with the combination of __chivalric__ and __holy__ _topographies]. he seems to belong to the __epic side__ of the genre, whereas the squire seems more interested in __courtly love__ [he is his _son_; is there a genealogy of the genre implied here, from epic to love?]. the description of the prioresse's good manners at the dining table would be a useful addition to the discussion of __gluttony__; the combination of __language and food__ seems a constant throughout these __religious people__.

	- "somewhat he lipsed for his wantownesse, | to make his englishh sweete upon his tongue."

444. the scope now expands towards the __urban laymen__ classes, artisans and merchants; the poet's focus seems to remain on what they __read__, what they __eat__, and what they __own__ [this could be the organizational criterion for this section; the following sections are instead arranged according to a moral classification, with the morally positive characters presented before the string of immoral ones]. the frankeleyn is first seen in the "compaygnie" of the man of law [he is a landowner]; he us a sanqwyn character, with a white beard - he likes "sop in wyn" because he is "an epicurean" [food justifies ideology; food explains and supports ideological choices]; his description is __entirely devoted__ to the __varieties of food__ found in his house throughout the year. the cook is at the service of the rich artisans [guildsmen]; he is described for his exceptional skills as a cook; he drinks fine "london ale," but he has a worrisome "mormar" - an __ulcer__ which was probably stinky and dangerous. after him the skilled shipman and doctour.

622. the characters that follow are __more problematic__: the wife of bath, the good parson, the plowman, his brother. the latter two are explicitly __positive figures__. the miller introduces the __final group__; he is an exceptionally big and strong man; his features are somewhat grotesque. they evoke __animals and objects__ (a sow, a furnace); he uses his "gret mouth" to tell jokes and bawdy stories; he is, occasionally, a sinner. contrasting with him, the reeve is exceptionally "sclendre" (lean), choleric, not "sangwyn"; well shaved and disciplined [there is __no mouth__ in his description]; the passage insists on __property__ - the one that he administers for his lord and the one that he has __personally collected__ over the years; __wealth__ [the contrast between these two characters would be worth considering again in detail; big mouth and no mouth; expansive and retentive].

858. the final two figures are __repuslively sinful__ - the hellish "somonour," lecherous and greedy, and the pardoner, "his freed and his comper," driven by greed and lies [two hellish characters; the friar's tale, concerning the somonour, is entirely about the devil]; chaucer is the __unspoken third member__ of this group; after him the hoost feeds the group and organizes the __tale telling__ competition; the formula is that of __romances__ - "and homward he shall tellen other two | of aventures that whilom han befalle"; it is accompanied by the swearing of "othes" [and it is a __game__; how are these elements connected to the tradition of romance, then? the journey as a means to gain more experience, the swearing of an oath, the competition and the reward?].

###The knight's tale

1055. like other romances, chaucer's rendition is immediately concerned with __naming and topography__ as a device to convey a distant temporality - here __classical antiquity__. having won many battles, theseus is returning to his home town, when he sees a group of mourning women. these are noble women from other greek towns, lamenting their losses and wishing to be given the __opportunity__ to bury their children; he does not stop at athens, but leaves there his wife and daughter [sister?] and rides straight to thebes [notice immediately the birth of romance - the very conflict at the basis of romance taking place at this moment; we have the women on one side, and the knight on the other; epos and eros] to avenge the women against creon. the language that they use is __boethian__, with references to the __fortune__ and his __wheel__. he swears "his ooth" to avenge them; under the banner of mars, he fights and kills creon. after the battle, among the bodies [the poet __explicitly rushes__ to this point _underlining the ellipses_], they find the two knights, side by side, arcita and palamon, recognized as noblemen from their insigna. they are imprisoned in athens, perpetually. years pass, until the day when emelye, awoken - like the pilgrims - by the __arrival of spring__, walks in the garden outside the castle, "as an aungel," fully described [she is fully described, apparently; as usual, the narrator turns the subject into someone desirable for the reader as well].

1274. remarkable __temporal compression__; the epic section is only mentioned, elliptically, and the real focus is the body of the __desired woman__. the two characters are __separated__ [like _amis and amiloun_; _their identity seems to indicate a condition of perfect stability, which is then broken by the intervention of fortune and other historical forces - eros here_]; "by aventure or cas," palamon is the first to perceive the beautiful girl. he cries, as if pricked by a sting; arcita, having heard him, thinks that he is complaining about their condition, and tries to __soothe__ him with boethian resignation - this is __fortune__; as in _t & c_, the __philosophical consolation__ can be used only in part to contrast the __phenomenology of love__. using the phenomenolohy of traditional descriptions, palemon thinks that he has seen goddess venus, and prays for her assistance (many __conflicting discourses and genres__ here [that is, many ways to understand, read, and soothe the same phenomenon; love is understood as a passion to satisfy, as a boethian happening, or as a divine theoxeny; our interpretation of the first paragraph is that it has to do with the way in which we use different textual traditions to make sense of our reality; but then again, this idea could be extended to many fragments in the tales]); then arcita, having seen the woman, falls in love too. a __debate__ about love ensues, between the two; the debate sould be pointless if it wasn't for the intervention of perotheus, who obtains the liberation of arcita from theseus. now the condition of the two characters is even __more uneven__. arcita is banished from the land; he thus suffers in a worse prisoun, because he is deprived of her [emile's] sight. his complaint is heavily boethian [probably in his description of the changes of fortune and prisony as an allegorical, rather than factual, state].

1461. both characters seem to adopt the __hypothetical mode__ to explore their fantasies of jealousy - for palamoun, arcita is the victorious brother, because he may summon an army against athens, and rescue the woman. __exile__ and __emprisonment__ (two punishments suffered by boethius [so, the first answer to the question "how is this tale boethian?" is - because of its prisons]) are contrasted - and the reader has to decide - who "hath the worse?" the tone remains __highly philosophical__ (contemplative?); palamoun now complains against the __providence__ set by an __omnipotent god__; it is a very powerful passage - which ends by contrasting __beasts and humans__ - the former, without eternal life - are free to pursue their lust as they wish. afflicted by love and melankolik fantasies, arcita is visited by mercurius in his sleep [the gods intervene constantly]; he is prompted to return to athens, where he will live in __disguise__, assisted by the transformation caused by __love sickness__ [fascinating take on this motif; _he is leaner and, in general, worse looking_]. like havelok, he starts working at the gates of the castle, then as "page of the chambre of emelye," under the pseudonym "philostrate" [ch.'s invention; a reference to _t&c_?]; eventually he becomes theseus' personal squier [social ascent, like in many romances read before - havelok, but also horn].

1662. in the meanwhile, palamoun spends seven more years in prison [the poet is deliberately stressing the __different chronologies__ of his narrative - the compression of his art], then, on one night, he manages to escape. by "fortune" or "aventure" [is ch. thematizing the use of these terms?], the two find themselves in the same "wood" [a motif again explicitly thematized by ch.; _chance_, and all the things that happen outside of our control]; caught by sudden melancholic inspiration, arcita voices a long __complaint__, where he confesses his true name and identity. having discovered him [__agnition__ works here in the opposite sense than usual; __agnition__ is here the cause of suffering], palamon accuses him of __falsity__ - the two are now __mortal enemies__ [they have chosen love over friendship - they are the _anti-amis and amiloun_]; they arrange a fight in the same wood, for the next day. in the fight, they perfectly __mirror__ each other.

1880. the poet now includes a ___digression__ on __providence__ [another __boethian__ force]; the "sighte above" that, by governing all "oure appetites," controls the entirety of __history__. by chance [providence?], theseus finds himself in the same woods, wishing to hunt. he stops the fight and obtains a confession from palamoun, who asks for the death of both [notice the recurrent invocations of __pagan gods__; are these in contrast with the __christian providence__ described by the poet? _this is the project of troilus too: paganism - heathen history - is the proof of the unfathomableness of divine providence; history can blind people so much that they cannot even identify its source_]. moved by the __compassion of the women__ witnessing the scene [it is the second time that this has happened in the tale _and with theseus_], theseus forgives the two knights; after having praised the god of love, and his powers, he establishes that a battle will determine emilye's husband.

2074. theseus builds a fantastic __arena__ to host the battle - of 200 men; this is decorated with three altars - mars, venus, dyane [the poet insists on the motif of pagan deities; there is certainly a contrast between this multiplicity and the single principle of providence; consider gower's thoughts on the matter, in _ca_]; the poet includes a description of each. the __ekphrasis__ resembles the second part of _fowls_ [inspired by _teseida_]; it becomes occasionally __visionary__, fantastical in its abundance of details [animated, like a picture leaving its twodimensional plane]. mars' temple is bloody and dark; diane is metamorphosis and femininity.

2294. after the description of the gods, we have a description of the armies; the warriors seem to echo the portrayal of mars - they seem to become statues themselves. before the beginning of the battle, palamoun prays for venus (a __surprising choice__ - he seemed to be the more belligerant one [there is a certain ambiguity in the treatment of the two knights' personalities; asi if chaucer wished to confuse us; perhaps the two characters of _teseida_ were more starkly contrasted; but these two are closer to _amis and amiloun_]; he asks for death in case his desire would not be satisfied, and venus replies with a sign. after him, emilye prepares her sacrifice for diane.

2482. the poet does not describe the sacrifice, but asks the reader to look at the corresponding descriptions in stace "and thise bokes olde" [is this a tale about religion?]. she asks to be preserved as a chaste maid, through a peaceful resolution; if that cannot happen, she asks for the victory of the man who most loves her. a __bloody omen__ is followed by the apparition of dyane herself; she foresees a __marriage__ [this is the only prayer that is not happily fulfilled; and marriage becomes the unsatisfying outcome; is chaucer anticipating the debates that will then constittute the marriage group? _marriage is a decision, a contract, an agreement in the world of the c. t.; here, in this tale, it is the event over which individual agencies have less control; nobody can do anything about it, not even diane]. finally, arcita promises his devotion - and his hair - to mars. the three prayers are replicated in the __olympus__ [heavens], where a __dispute__ between venus and mars is sedated by "saturnus the colde"; the grandfather of the gods, he will bring "pees" through __death__; so he promises [prof. crane suggested looking at the role of jupiter in this scene].

2683. after the celebration, the battle begins - as a huge, collective __spectacle__; the attention and sympathy of the audience is divided among the fighters (like for the gods and the three characters [each supporting a side, almost irrationally; the reader, instead, cannot really side with anyone - they all seem perfectly equivalent]); aware of the importance of the fighters, theseus transforms the battle into a "tourneyinge"; the two lovers are again __perfectly symmetrical__; their sides are "evene." the game is __fast and violent__, despite the rules; arcite eventually defeats palamon, who is brought to the "stake" oudside the arena; in heaven, venus weeps, but saturnus comforts her [the gods are acting exactly like the humans under them; there is a superior force operating here]. arcite is celebrating.

	- the poet declares one cardinal equivalence: "wommen [...] folwen alle the favour of fortune" [more than an equivalence, a correspondence; women's wishes follow closely the operations of fortune; the favor of a woman is therefore equivalent to the favor of fortune; this is the principle shaping _t. and c._, of course].

2881. through pluto, saturnus sends a furie to distract the horse and make arcite fall - he is mortally wounded [_it is an accident_; the poet emphasizes the __incomprehension__ of people, who find this death unjust; they cannot see the furie, and the gods behind it; _boethius is the root of this dissociation, of course; but the incomprehension motif could also be connected to the traditional interpretation of the gospels, retold, for instance, in the york corpus christi_]. the battle ends in __peace__; arcite's wound swells and poisons him, beyond nature's control; arcite sends a letter to emilye, to commend her to his friend's true love (he praises palamoun [the two characters return friends; they were found in the same pile of corpses, after a battle, like amis and amiloun; they now collaborate again, and mourn for each other, like the two friends]); then he dies, and the poet stresses how he cannot follow the soul in its journey - he has neither experience nor sources [__pagan__, or atheist, perspective; _unclear point here; is this to say that, since there is no hereafter, there is no christian perspective on the circumstance?_]; everybody mourns him; the only __consolation__ is provided by theseus' father, egeus, who comforts him with __boethian arguments__ - about __transmutacioun__ and mortals as "__pylgrimes__." arcite is buried in the wood of the first fight.

3108. the funeral; the poet devotes more time to this ritual, as if it was closer to our beliefs and customs [does saturn stand for the monotheistic christian god? _he is the god of time and of catastrophe_]; but he cannot say too much. the high fire required the sacrifice of many trees, which provokes the displacement of "the goddes" that inhabited them; the full ritual is actually described through a long __occupatio__ [that is, a long and detailed list of things that the poet will not mention]. many years after this explicitly pagan occasion, theseus summons palamon and emilye to bring peace between their cities. his speech begins with a hymn to the neoplatonic "first moveeree," that seems to echo _dante_ - fully christian, and boethian in its connection between the "faire cheyne of love" and the life on earth [he seems to have learned this lesson from his father; _the romance is therefore enacting and displaying its own pedagogy; like dante, romance is a paideia; and of course the divine comedy is a romance as well_] - although the god is here jupiter. the two marry.

###The miller's prologue and tale

3186. the miller interrupts the game (it should be the monk's turn) and breaks the meter - he knows the right story to "quite the knyghtes tale." a fall from decorum; admittedly drunk, he wants to speak of "lewed dronken harlotrie," but the reve stops him, as a __moral censor__. the poet admits that he must tell the story, regardless of his moral stance [that is, chaucer the pilgrim is there to report everything].

3382. the carpenter and the clerk are immediately juxtaposed; the clerk is an unlikely hero for the miller - he is skilled in every art, but especially "__astrologye__" (he is a reader of the skies [and an intellectual; this is an instance of a higher discourse entering a foreign context; boethius and christianity were appropriated by pagan heroes and gods in the knight's tale; here we have the scientific notions of the clerk used for debauchery; in the following tale, the miller's aspirations and the problematic aubade]); the miller's style is expressive; his point of view (his ethical stance) always explicit; he describes in detail the carpenter's young wife, using many siiles - many animal similes - to describe her exceptional beauty. she and the clerk agree on a secret meetinh; he sings his psalter in celebration. the style of the miller employs the same detailed __bodily descriptions__ found in the _general prologue_; a second character, absolon [two suitors, like in the _knight's tale_], the curled parish clerk, starts wooing the carpenter's wife, publicly.

3582. having agreed on a plan, nicholas and alison trick the carpenter into believing that he is dead [_almost dead_; he plays the part in his bed, knowing that the carpenter's knave is spying on him; __performance__ is a key aspect of this plan, and of the entire tale]; then he makes the carpenter think that, through an __elaborate method__, he has discovered an important secret about them. the clerk plays the part of the __prophet__ instructing the layman; using the example of __noah and the flood__ [quintessential in the york cycle; there it was the emblem of the temporal mise en abyme leading from interpretation to interpretation, the machine of time repeating itself; god asking noah to build an ark, the actor god asking the actor noah to build the fiction of an ark], he asks the carpenter to place himself, his wife and him inside three "knedyng tubbes" [__interpretation__; references to the _mystery plays_ tradition; we have already learned that absolon used to play herodes]. odd number three [that is, it is odd that the clerk keeps referring to two characters, noah and his wife, as he is instead forming a triangle in reality].

3782. [it is a surprisingly interesting take on the corpus christi tradition; alisoun and nicholas perform the roles of noah's wife and - perhaps - god, trying to impose the role of noah on the carpenter _and this is the true literary discourse applied onto a foreign reality; the characters of the fabliau have become the interpreters of a mystery play; the relationship between their reality and the unfathomable set of forces affecting them - divinity, chance, providence - is here lower._] the poet includes a digression on the power of "__affecioun__" and "__ymaginacioun__," for which the carpenter can almost "verraily [...] see" the arrival of the flood. the plan succeeds; but absolon has noticed the absence of the carpenter; he goes to her window again, but he is - again [that is, again with respect to the flood trick] - tricked into kissing the girl's hairy ass; __substitution__ [this might perhaps be a parodic take on the motif of substitution, as found in romances].

3854. the trick is repeated, with the addition of a loud fart - instead of her sweet voice [substitution, again; ch. is especially fond of the equivalence between human voice and sound, and human voice and bodily noises] - by nicholas; but this time absolon has a hot iron to burn him; nicholas' cry for help ["water!"] is misunderstood by the carpenter, who falls from the roof into the tub, and is believed mad from then on [this is the combination of the two stories, skillfully stitched together through a meditation on human agency - cause and effect - and their misinterpretation as divine signs; _and think about readability too; think about the readability of the signs made by the three gods in the temples of the knight's tale, and the readability of this single sign - "water"].

###The reeve's prologue and tale

3920. the only pilgrim who is not amused by the tale is the reeve; he explains that his old age is a sign of __experience__, but not of __exhaustion__ of desire [it is a strange opening; the reeve has a problematic way of describing and addressing his own body; as a sort of extraneous machine]. the reeve uses __complex natural imagery__ (fire, vegetables, liquids) to describe the __permanence of desire and sin__ in __old age__.

4126. the reeve's style is less colorful; his protagonist is a miller who, like the one in the g. p., steals and sins [the vocabulary that the reeve uses is more controlled; limited; the syntax and the metre are more regular]. this tale emphasizes the __social and economic circumstances__, rather than sheer description; the miller is a sort of criminal, threatening and violent, while his wife is arrogant because of her education at a nunnery (for which the poet repeats the phrase "hooly bood") [the tale uses many northern expressions]. the circumstance changes when two "povre scolers" visit the miller to ground their "corn"; the two make fun of the miller, who decides to trick them by losing their horse and stealing their corn [the two were trying to stay in the mill, to prevent him from stealing; but he used his practical wits to distract them and steal the corn].

4324. the two scolars ask to be hosted by the miller; at night his whole family snores loudly, and one of the scolers decides to have sex with the miller's daughter; the poet reports his speech; there is a "lawe" that grants them the right to be avenged; they want "esement." by __force__ one rapes the daughter, and by a __stratagem__ the other sleeps with the wife. but the two make a mistake [the stratagem ends up working against their will], and they are discovered - a __complicated__, fast fight ensues, which ends with the wife killing the miller, and the two scolers leaving with the stolen corn. [__substitution__ is the leading principle, here too; the characters apply higher discourses to their low status (and story): the daughter is said to be "of swich lynage," and she salutes the rapist with a sort of __aubade__ that reveals the position of the corn; _the misinterpreted trick is here the displacement of the cradle at the end of the miller's bed; this provokes an interpretive mistake by the wife and, later, by the second scoler; the result is pure tragedy and murder - not fun at all_].

###The cook's prologue and tale

4364. the cook seems now the only character amused by the reeve's tale, which he reads as a cautionary tale against giving lodging to strangers. __his tale is compared to his dishes__, often cooked poorly and in bad conditions. the cook's tale will quyte the host's joke.

4422. the tale opens with the description of perkys revelour, a lecherous gambler [the gap between the tone of the tale and its actual object is now even wider; the cook seems to be praising the depraved apprentice; the miller's ethical stance concorded with the contents of his tale, with the virtues that the reader should actually praise; the reeve's tale was colder, somehow disengaged; the cook, finally, clearly praises the wrong character] and a "prentyce." having been discovered [while he was stealing] many times by his mayster, he is eventually sent away; in the last few lines, we discover that the prentice had a whore as his wife. possibly incomplete.
