#Fragment 3

|Contents|Form|Key-words|
|:---:|:---:|:---:|
|Wife of Bath's Tale; Friar's Tale; Summoner's Tale|Couplets (pentameter)|Apologia; Literary tradition; Scripture; Interpretation; Debate; Latin and vernacular; Social detail; Education; Aventure; Trade; Misunderstanding; Speech; Dream; Urban naturalism|

##Introduction

- the connection with the previous fragment is conjectural. the wife of bath's tale constitutes the core of the __marriage group__, which finds its completion between fragments 4 and 5; marriage is not the exclusive concern of these fragments, nor is its discussion exclusive to them. it is, however, the topic that chaucer seems to be addressing more explicitly.

- the genre of the wife of bath's prologue is that of a __literary confession__. it was probably inspired by the analogous monologue of la vieille in the _roman de la rose_; the books that jankyn refers to belong to an extensive tradition of anti-feminine literature. her tale is a short arthurian romaance; its message combines women's sovereignity with gentilesse.

- the friar's tale is based on a renown pattern; it is an exemplum. the character's concern is words [taken literally].

- the summoner's tale is a fabliau; it responds to the friar's story by turning words into wind.

##Comment

###The wife of bath's prologue

162. the wife begins by defining a topic - "mariage" - and a method - "experience"; she is not afraid, however, of using __textual authorities__ - and she arranges them __against__ each other; the gospels against the genesis [the praise of chastity against god's injuction to go forth and multiply], for instance. the problem is the number of mariages that she has had. __ethical problem__; __textual resolution__ made impossible by __contradiction__ [this would be the first problem, the model problem - how many marriages can we have? it finds no solution in the text, at least apparently; the different sources are simply juxtaposed until they reach a stage of self-evident contradiction; textual authority, then, would here be proved to be insufficient to address the question]. it is a strongly __argumentative text__. the wife justifies her behavior as a conscious choice; she concludes by asserting her __sovereignity__ over the men [the husbands; and this is the main claim of her confession].

370. the pardoner interrupts her by saying that, since that is the perspective, he will not marry; the wife asks him to wait until she has finished telling her story before deciding on the topic (then, __experience__ is the true authority [textual authority has been refused earlier, when its impossibility to solve her doubt was proved; notice that we are now considering a different topic, the objective value of marriage]). she starts by describing the three __happy marriages__, by which she gained land; this becomes an invitation to __imitate__ her speech [to use portions of her speech, as she is using portions of other people's speeches], with the purpose of obtaining more goods and wealth. she delivers a __hypothetical speech__ [hypothesis is the mode of romances] where she responds to the ideal accusations - misogynistic - addressed to her by her husband (the formula is an __anaphoric__ "thou seyst"). the tone becomes increasingly __aggressive__, and it contains references to a possible affair between her and the "apprentice janekyn." she insists on her independence and self-sovereignity [again, the core of the speech; but the topic changed again - from the praise of marriage to the worthiness of women].

562. the wife continues to possess and deliver, to __interpret__ again, the misogynistic discourses spoken by her previous husbands. then she describes her actual behavior - the __constant negotiation__ of her autonomy and sovereignity; it is, in a way, the convincing and passionate monologue that the character of a fabliau (or a romance?) would utter [and, paradoxically, her following story concerns a knight; why a knight? why not a female character? perhaps things will get clearer as we look at the shipman's tale]. the confession progresses through husbands and years [experience in the making; the experience of the knight in the subsequent tale, the experience of the pilgrims, both linear and circular; _consider how, in the end, both the tale and the whole poem suggest that learning is achieved through a combination of both, experience and learning - experience and speech, language, textual tradtion_], until the last one - the worst and most beloved [and it is a succession that brings no learning with it, that actually worsens rather than improve].

787. the marriage with jenkyns starts with a conventional scene of seduction, in the "feeldes" and accompanied by their go-between (a "gossip"); it ends, however, with jenkyn's literate misogynistic speech, and the wife's ripping of a page from his book of "wikked wyves" [the wife knows, apparently, a lot of astrology; she moves easily among these canonical sources], full of biblical and classical exempla; __refusal of a written tradition__. [is this sequence of wise texts, opening with genesis and the gospels, antithetical to the romance _that she will tell_?]

856. after the ripping of the book and a physical struggle, the two find a __compromise__; she gains her sovereignity, and the book is burnt [happy ending]. the prologue ends with the friar and sumonour arguing [about her long prologue; the friar scolds her for it, and the sumonour scolds the friar for the remark, telling him that it is not something that he should be concerned with].

###The wife of bath's tale

1056. the tradition which ch. is referring [to] here is that of the __breton lais__, with a land "filfild of fayerye," and "elves" everywhere; the poem has an __immediate satyrical__ turn, emphasizing the way in which these fairies have been replaced by __swarming friars__ [from pagan gods to christian ambassadors].

	- the image is wonderful; it is as if the __change__ had occurred because of __space__, like a __pure displacement__ [a logistical change, not a cultural one].

	- the tale begins with a knight from arthur's court [remember that this was a __paragon of virtue__!] raping "a mayde" found by a river; it is a bleak and surprising premise, at odds with the allegedly __idealizing__ tone of the genre. according to the "lawe," he should be punished by death; but he is surprisingly defendend by the women, who feel __compassion__ for him. the queen sends him on a year long mission [a motif in _sggk_ and others] to discover "what thyng is that wommen moost desiren." the __adventure of romance__ seems equivalent to the __wife's experience__. the knight, however, receives __many contradictory answers__ [like the many voices at the beginning of the prologue]; the wife inserts a digression to justify one of these; it is a short episode from ovide's mydas [we are reminded that this tale has a didactic purpose; that it is __exemplary and pedagogical__, like the knight's travel]. the __avantoure__ leads him to meet a "daunce" of "ladyes" that vanishes as he approaches, leaving only an old foul woman; she gives him the right answer - "sovereynetee," after having asked him to "plight" his "treuthe"; the __treuthe__ was to do whatever she required first; after his deliverance, she requires to marry him [the motifs of romance are here; the pledging of _treuthe_, _agnition_, deceit and unreadable signs (like those of _sggk_); but the development seems strikingly unsatisfactory, as if the progression was still missing something, some sort of struggle that might justify the knight's eventual understanding; or perhaps even a form of _violence_, of _punishment_ - something losely equivalent to the scar on gawain's neck].

1264. the marriage is interpreted as the old woman's __control__ over his body; a __sexual contract__ [how is the romance developing from the preceding speech? as a sort of _dream_, a sort of reinvention which mixes and rearranges the elements of experience into another order; remember that, somehow, this was the way in which the old woman described her own relationship to the first three marriages - she had control over her husband's bodies, but she was also using her own body as a commodity to be exchanged with different goods - land, wealth; at the same time, she has always insisted to keep control over her own body, and at times this wish has been frustrated - this is, then, also a sort of fantasy - the old woman becoming young again]; it is a perspective that we found in the prologue too. the romance seems a __hypothetical, imaginative speculation__ on this paradox - what if women detained control over the male body [an assumption contradicted by the very force used by the knight at the beginning of this tale]? the knight justifies his refusal to sleep with the old lady with the fact that she is lacking "gentilesse"; but the lady rejects this justification through an elaborate argument, quoting dante and the scriptures [and boethius]. she is learned and rhetorically effective; her final claim is that __gentilesse__ is virtue, and it comes from __god__. eventually she offers him the __option__: does he want her beautiful or virtuous? he gives her power to decide - and she kissees him in gratitude; now she can be both. [how is this decision connected to her speech? _also, isn't this alternative a sexist alternative, an alternative founded on the very misogynistic discourses that she has tried to reject for so long? what is this fantasy eventually about? the fantasy of an intellectually capable woman? the fantasy of old age making for the faults in the body?_] it is a happy conclusion, like the wife's fifth marriage; but how is __gentilesse__ connected to this choice [a gift from god]?

###The friar's prologue and tale

1300. the friar decides to change the tone of the discussion from the subjects of "scole-matere" [this would confirm the fact that the wife's fantasy is also a fantasy of intellectual achievement; a woman speaking in a man's voice; a man writing a woman speaking in a man's voice] to a "game"; his story will be a joke against the sumonour; the implication is that the wife spoke __seriously__.

1503. the friar's description of an overzealous "erchedeken" and his loyal "sumonour" is interrupted by the sumonour himself; the story concerns __lechery__. the somonour collects most of his information from the local bawds; and he frames and robs innocent men by having them seduced by wenches [the __negative portrait__ resembles that of the miller in the _reeve's tale_; it is also very consistent with the portrait of the sumonour in the general prologue]. one day, by chance, the somonour finds a "baily" [his secular analogue; what is the meaning of this analogy, though?] headed to his town; the two decide to form a coalition, and exchange __trouthe__ [this short exemplum has some elenments of romance in it; _the motif of romance appears here too_]. the ensuing dialogue is entirely based on an __equivalence__ between the two professions - based on "__extorcioun__"; the yeoman and the somonour are [_initially?_] identical, "from helle"; but suddenly the yeoman's speech becomes strangely metaphysical, as if his profession and his very identity were those of "fende" [so that the trajectory is: sacred - secular - sacred].

1664. the yeoman explains that he can __change forms__ and summon the __dead__ [this is all material for romances, potentially]; although his presence has become threatening, the sumonour remembers his treuthe, and he remains loyal to it. two encounters define the rest of the tale: in the first one, the feed shows the somonour how he takes any curse about the devil __literally__ [that is, people sending things to hell, and people regretting their own words]; in the second one, the somonour seems to have ignored this teaching [rhetorical pedagogy], and he is taken to __hell__, in pain [this might deserve more consideration, then; how is this tale, this lack of pedagogical development associated with the value of words, connected to the previous one? especially since both are using motifs from romances - treuthe, agnition, and the deceit of appearances; perhaps the friar's tale is much more serious than we might initially assume; the summoner's problem, in general, is that he does not take words seriously, even in his own profession, and he is punished for that; he fails to do what the knight did properly in the preceding tale - listening to the old woman's words, applying her instructions, and being loyal to his oath; the moral, then, is that we should take our own speech very seriously].

###The summoner's prologue and tale

1708. the prologue is a short, colorful description of a journey made by a friar in hell, where he sees the place where all friars go: inside satanas' butthole; hilarious __dream vision__ [this might be the funniest moment in the entire book].

1903. the tale begins with a friar selling masses (in packets of "trentals") to the people, in sermons; then he walks around asking for rich foods and goods [(this time the friar is the one who interrupts the story) the style is especially lively; many verbs, in dense succession - a __vivid narrative__]. eventually he visits a sick man, whose wife and food he seems to enjoy in abundance [the friar is a glutton; as we will learn, in this context words are farts, and farts are goods]. he is a __verbose liar__; he thrives on death [prayers and masses are required more often as death approaches]; he condemns __gluttony__.

2106. the friar cannot stop preaching, overwhelming the sick man - thomas. he condemns "ire" as well; his long sermon is reminiscent of the _pardoner's tale_ [indulging in the sins that it condemns], but also of the style adopted by the wife [of bath]; he uses inset short narratives [exempla; _like the old woman in the wife's tale?_], which seem to be eventually problematic or ambiguous in their __interpretation__; false sermon [they contradict themselves, or they are employed poorly and unconvincingly by the speaker; they often seem to imply more than the friar would admit; in a way, they truly resemble the initial series of contrasting sources presented by the wife].

2294. the friar becomes more and more insistent in his request for money; having grown irate, thomas tricks him into getting a fart, to be shared with his brothers; the friar, angered, tells the story to the "lord of that village"; but this is more interested in the otiose question of "how to share a fart" than in the actual effrontery [the otiose problem becomes the paradoxical center of the story; perhaps an irreverent parody of the serious debates presented by the wife - about gentilesse and sovereignetee; here everything is reduced to pure noise]. the discussion - a "demonyak" problem - distracts the witnesses as well [the bystanders who have listened to the friar's denounciation of thomas' joke], who are comforted by the solution suggested by the lord's squire, almost __scientific__ [in tone, but not in practice; his solution is to put the friars on a cart, and have them smell the fart simultaneously; _again, potentially a parody of the "scole-matere" discussed by the wife_].
