#The canterbury tales - Fragment 5

##introduction

- there was probably no interruption between the end of fr. iv and the beginning of fr. v; most manuscrpits present them as a single, continuous whole. squire after __merchant__ [his tale was the one about januarie and the pear tree].

- the squire's tale is a romance full of promise; its fantastical approach to the genre was fashionable at the time ["magic that works," cooper would say]. it is slow in its exposition, probably __deliberately unfinished__.

- the franklin's tale seems to resume the discussion of marriage. it is a __breton lay__, although it has no breton antecedents, and its source is boccaccio (filocolo and decameron); besides, it focuses on __mariage__ and has little __supernatural__ elements [they are all explained pseudoscientifically], and on "troth."

##the squire's tale

8. the squier is asked to "sey somwhat of love" by the host; he agrees, apologizing for his "amys" style [the discussion on style was already present in the inversion between genre and decorum attempted by the clerk and the merchant].

211. the setting of the tale is the european east, "the land of tartarye"; here everything is __hyperbolically__ excellent and beautiful (the triumph of exotism); the richness of this setting contrasts with the constantly __apologetic tone__ of the narrator, who deems himself uncapable of expressing its true beauty. we find here a __sumptuous feast__; like in _sggk_, the celebration is interrupted by the arrival of an __unexpected knight__, who brings with himself precious gifts from "arabe" and "inde" [more exotic than the exotic; this seems to answer cooper's question about the limits of wonder, the fact that wonder by definition has to be constantly overcome]; according to the squire, his __rhetorical abilities__ are another marvel [like those of gawain himself]. the first gift is a "steede of bras" that can travel anywhere; the second a mirror of prophecy; the third a ring to understand beasts; the fourth an invincible sword [all the ingredients of romance - travel, romance [_eros_; the mirror can show you your "newe love"], nature, war]. the horse produces most wonder.

408. the poet reports the astonished reactions and murmurs of the people witnessing the scene; they use __different textual traditions__ to explain these wonders (scientific, philosophical, mythical); __accumulation of references__, potentially pointless (another hyperbole [analogies with chaunticleer, with the monk, and with the whole seventh fragment]). now the king retires to a room where people play celestial music (everything is __heavenly__; [suggestion of an allegorical value, perhaps]); again the squire uses the trope of __ineffability__ in an __apologetic__ way. the greatest "wondrying" is again the horse, whose mechanism the knight now explains - it reacts to the "trilling" of some of its pins, accompanied by __verbal instructions__ [the knight emphasizes the "ere" of the animal]. after dinner, they all go to sleep; the poet's attention now focuses on the princess, excited for the gifts; she wakes up before dawn, to have a walk outside; she seems possessed by __exceptional energy [vitality]__, the __liveliness__ of young blood.

	- as he explains that she can understand the birds, the squire includes a __digression against digressions__ [he is rushing, and paradoxically not rushing, towards the core of his tale; _is the ring a ring of interpretation?_ a ring that allows us to read beyond the literal, the primary meaning, the signifiers, to access the actual signified found in nature? how is it in contrast with the communication - mechanical, artificial, insincere - happening between the horse and the rest of the court - the __wonder that everybody is attracted to__, compared to the wonder that __nobody looks at__, and that is paradoxically more important?].

601. the real "knotte" of the tale, then, is a "faucun," crying in a piteous voice, beaten with her own wings, pierced with her beak; an image of __compassion__, irresistible; for now this compassion is caused solely by __nonverbal elements__ - such as, for instance, the __ineffable__ "fairnesse" of the faucon, such a wonder for which, perhaps, no words at all would be adequate. thanks to the ring, the two can start speaking; and the first few words seem to evoke _dante_ - "that ye be in this furial pyne of helle?"; the woman insists on the vocabulary of "__compassioun__" [the bird keeps swooning - another dantean reference?]; the bird does the same. after her upbringing, she was seduced by a deceiving tercelet, a "feende" in disguise [these are the same animals of _parliament of fowls_]; after a long wooing, she __submitted__ to his will; their "marriage" lasts two years; then he has to leave [the reasons are not explained fully; many connections with the marriage group].

708. although they had promised to love each other, the tercelet is actually seeking a new love; here we find the same image that will later be used, in a more explicitly antiboethian fashion, by the _manciple_ - a bird cannot remain in its cage if let free, no matter how pleasant this [the cage] is; thus, he suddeny falls in love with another "kyte." the women feel, again, great empathy for the bird [this is, __also__, a metaphor for reading; remember that inferno v is, __also__, a great canto about reading; about the way in which we are moved by what we read]; the girl brings her [the bird] with her to the palace, and there she tries to heal her. the squire then interrupts this side of the story to anticipate the many "aventures" and "batailles" that will follow; but his story is interrupted by the "frankeleyn" (he is the __glutton__ landowner in the _g. p._), who paradoxically praises his good style and tells him that, despite his youth, he has a __promising skill__ [remember that the praise could be for chaucer himself__], which he compares with those of his __rebuked son__ [this is a crucial connection, yet mysterious in its full implications], lacking in __virtues__ (a small dark detail; remember that the squire is the knight's son [what is this digression referring to, then? the wish of small aristocracy to repossess the lost ideals of romance through its lowest examples? who is the franklin's son?]). he will tell his tale.

##The franklin's prologue and tale


