#Fragment 4

##Introduction

- it contains only the _clerk's tale_ and the _merchant's tale_. here the work's concern with __style__ becomes explicit; the clerk tells a learned tale, but using a __simple style__ [simple is not the right word; plain, perhaps; straightforward, definitely not ornate; it is one of the most beautiful things chaucer has written]; the merchant, on the other hand, tells a common fabliau [popular], but his style is extremely __ornate__.

- the clerk's tale is based on petrarch's adaptation of the last tale in the decameron; it is a story of feminine __endurance__ and male sadism [reminiscent of the man of law's tale, about _cunstance_], often problematic for its readers.

- the merchant's tale mixes the __structure of fabliau__ with the __style of romance__; it is bitter [debatable; it is also sort of funny].

##The clerk's prologue and tale

56. a [short note on these short introductions: notice how they describe an endless ride, almost cyclical. they always resume a journey that seems to never end, to be almost always __advancing__, yet always the same. a __metaphysical__ journey. _many affinities with the tone of piers plowman; the sequence of awakenings and the deterioration of his clothing and status as a pilgrim, as a traveler; the pilgrimage is an incomplete series of stops - it is a combination of realism and dream vision - we are always walking; we wake up, and we are still walking, riding._] the hoost asks the clerk to tell a happy story in a plain style (excluding "youre termes, youre colours, and youre figures"); he wants him to leave his __silent meditation__ [the clerk seems always absorbed by his thoughts]. the clerk starts by declaring the __source__ and __origin__ of his tale, petrarch and padua; among the characters in this introduction he mentions "deeth," through a grim digression. many geographical details.

259. the tale is told in the __rhyme royal__ stanza [like the man of law's tale]. but, as explained in the introduction, the style is controlled and straightforward - petrarchean (reminiscent of many sections of _t&c_, _for its slowness, although perhaps even plainer than that_). the opening contrasts the selfish happiness of an unmarried "markys" - walter - and the concern of his people, voiced by a wise man among them. the broken marriage is, apparently, a flaw in the __social contract__ between the ruler and the people; it is an element that detracts from their full happiness. to be complete, the lord has to sumbit to the "soveraynetee" of marriage, to have an heir (but also to __improve morally__, at least apparently). the conclusion is a sort of __contract__ between the two sides; the people have to submit to his decision, and revere his future wife, whoever she will be [pledging an oath generates this sort of sumbission of will, as in the _wife of bath's tale_]. he establishes a day, and promises that he'll be wedded by then; far from there [the gates of the castle and the outskirts of the city, another motif of romance], the poorest man of the country lives with his fair, virtuous daughter; she behaves like a __humble saint__. walter has noticed and lusted her while hunting [a combination of reverence and lechery, as in the subsequent tale]; but, having resisted, he chooses her [for his wife; _how is this a retelling of the wife of bath's tale?_].

448. a huge celebration has been prepared for the wedding. unaware of this [that is, of the markys' intentions to marry her in particular], the maiden, grisilidis, is looking forward to seeing the new "markyesse," when walter rides to her home to ask for her hand. the father submits to his will (it is a sort of __exortion__ [a motif everywhere in the poem; consider, for instance, the brief physician's tale]); but walter wants her consent too; he presents the marriage as a __deliberate submission__ to his will - __total submission__; she accepts, and he presents her as the new markyesse. she is spoiled of everything she owned, and clothed with new clothing [a highly __symbolical ritual__]; it is as if she acquired a __new identity__ [though she does not; it is the performance of a false agnition]. she is as good of a wife (housekeeper) as she is a ruler [marriage as an allegory of monarchy], just as beloved by her people; she has a daughter [the motif of __gentilesse__ is found here, as well as the allegorical valence of marriage; _the two are therefore connected again, after the wife of bath's tale; in a way, she is answering to the knight's question about the old wife's worth_].

651. the markys wishes to test the ethical strength of his wife; he wants to "assaye" [motif of many of these works, _sggk_, _horn_] her loyalty to him, her "treuthe" [she becomes, therefore, equivalent to the knight under trial, and to the woman, or steward, whose faithfulness has to be tested after the husband's exile]. he makes her believe that he has to murder their daughter; she consents to his will, and he instructs a servant to __stage__ the fake murder [fine psychological detail in the description of these scenes _reminiscent of the m. e. amis and amiloun_; accurate, yet not as insistent as in _t. & c._; __performance__ is a strategic device here as well, as in the miller's tale]; she shows endurance and constancy [many similarities with the _man of law's tale_]. the markys hides the daughter in "boilogne"; the woman shows no change in her disposition [this is, instead, a resistance to one of the motifs of romance; the virtue of the woman is that she never changes - there is no metamorphosis to justify agnition; she is a perennially unchanging sign]. six years later, he decides to "assaye" her again, this time with their son.

854. she sumbits to his will entirely, again; she explains that she has left "at hoom al my clothing" with "my wil and al my libertee." the scene is repeated; again she asks the grim servant to bury the child, to protect him from the fowls and beasts [this is a crucial concern for her; it is her only explicit request, besides that of spending an instant more with their children before they are taken from her; it is worth asking _why_ this happens]; again she receives no answer [the clerk insists on the __negative side__ of the markys' inclination _(his wish to assaye; it is as if there was an implicit parallel with thomas touching jesus' wounds; again, look at the corpus christi tradition)_; his wish to "assaye" is presented as a __bad trait__, almost as a vice _(think about morgan and bertilak in sggk too)_]. the people start murmuring about the markys' wickedness, and the two infanticides. the markys devises a new way to "assaye" her submission; he counterfeits some "popes bulles," so that they impose that he should take a new wife [her reaction to this choice is a submission to a boethian "fortune"]; __patience__ [like in the physician's tale, the despotic, capricious desires of the monarch correspond to the obscure forces of history against which we are helpless; and, like in the man of law's tale, the female protagonist of this story could stand for the human soul in general; _the difference is that here her character is defined in much more detail; it is a realistic individual, not a flat allegory like cunstance_].

1050. again the wife submits to his will, accepting to return to her father's house; the clerk grants her a moment of authentic __compassion__ when she thinks about the moment when they first met - contrasting new love with old [as if she did not believe the "bulles," but instead understood the divorce as his own decision; _it is a wonderful moment; the clerk's understanding of her interiority brings him closer to the wife of bath; the wife is a female intellectual, a female clerk; and the clerk shows that he cares deeply for women, choosing to side with his female protagonist; the contrast between old and new is another detail that could be drawn from the previous tale_]. she is compared to __job__ - and the clerk reminds his audience that nobody can be as "humble" and as "true" as a woman [again, this protofeminist statements align his perspective with that of the wife of bath; there is even a rejection of a textual tradition here]. the people witnesses her walk away from the palace, and back to her poor home; she is wearing her original clothes, unchanged [the clerk is, again, playing with the motif of agnition]; in the meanwhile, the two children are summoned to the palace, and walter pretends that his daughter is the new bride. he summons grisilde to assist in the preparations for the feast; she accepts; seeing the two children, the people change their allegiance, and murmur in support of the markys' decision; their opinion, like __fame__, is constantly changing [obscure forces of history, again]. the markys teases grisilde.

1212. but the woman remains patient and constant. the markys is eventually moved and convinced; he reveals the ways in which he has "assayed" her "stedfastnesse," and the scene becomes a __triumphant agnition__ [eventually, the motif that had been discarded is here employed fully and satisfactorily, with the children recognized as such; the beauty of the new bride understood as dependent from that of the previous one]. the woman melts in tears of joy, displaying her interiority in full (the same feelings that she had __concealed__ for so long), in a very __moving scene__; the clerk concludes by stating the purpose of the story: we should __imitate__ griseide in constancy, although her "humylitee" would be "importable" [intolerable; that is, the story should be read beyond the gender of its protagonist; the story has nothing to do with gender, and is instead focused on general human virtue; it has to be said, however, that the clerk seemed very concerned with the gender of his character a few lines earlier, in the comparison with job; but maybe that detail too was not meant to be read literally]. this is why petrark wrote the story. the clerk ends with an "envoy" where he actually __contradicts the literal reading__ of the tale, suggesting that women, like the __wife of bath__ [eventually explicitly acknowledged as a source], should not be patient, but voice their will.

##The merchant's prologue and tale

1244. the merchant's experience is that of an anthitesis of the clerk's griseidis - a true "shrewe"; the sufference that he has endured because of her could only ne understood through __experience__ [tone and words seem to quote and subvert the wife of bath's prologue].

1468. the opening of his tale resembles the clerk's; a bachelor near pavye who wishes to marry, and prays god to lend him a wife - although too late, since he "was passed sixty yeer"; the merchant adopts a perspective that seems __antithetical to his experience__, praising marriage as the "yoke" that makes "lyf bilsful and ordinaat." like the wife of bath, the merchant quotes thinkers who disagree with him, to __refute their claims__; he seems to be describing an ideal of marriage similar to the one suggested by a __literal reading__ of the clerk's tale [__blindness__; incapacity to read a story properly, a story non-literally; this is the topic of the tale]; he is actually quoting some phrases used by the clerk [using some of the same vocabulary and phrases]. his entire speech is a praise of women that seems to contribute [argue for] to their submission. eventually we get back to the subject of the story, the old "januarie"; it is as if the preceding speech was a description of his thoughts [therefore, the narrator's voice concords completely with the perspective adopted by its main character]. he asks his friends to find him a young wife, whose behavior he wil be able to mold as he wishes [__old and new__; again a motif from _the wife of bath's tale_, and from the conclusion of _the clerk's tale_]; he will copulate but not procreate.

1654. januarie is certainly not a positive character; he wants pleasure in marriage too, only of a different sort. a __debate__ ensues: placebo explains that a counselor's duty is to support his lord, whatever he thinks; justinus thinks that advice should always be sincere [the __political__ plane is aligned with the discussion about __wedding__; wedding and the contrast between __democracy__ (parliament) and __monarchy__ are always paired], and advises him against marriage. but januarie, angered, disagrees with him, and organizes his marriage anyway. he starts fantasizing about the ideal woman, as if his mind was "a mirour" set in a "commune market-place" [women are therefore equated to commodities, _a relevant choice for the merchant; perhaps the same thought found in balzac's mirror in the street? the birth of the hypothetical mode of the novel, its exploratory contemplation, in the words and thoughts of romance_], comparing their features. he eventually chooses one woman, and summons his council to communicate his decision; but before that can happen, he asks them whether the perfect bliss of earthly marriage will prevent him from attaining the bliss of heaven [a religious doubt; but maybe a frivolous one too?].

1854. justinus, jokingly, answers that the marriage might well be his "purgatorie," after which his soul will be able "to hevene skippe"; in a weird __narrative move__, his character even refers to the __authority of the "wyf of bathe"__, as if she was an established literary figure; the marriage is eventually sanctioned, and the poet describes explicitly its __religious aspect and ritual__ [not that common in the c.t. and in romance]; it is a __combination__ of __political and religious concerns__. the feast is such a joyous celebration that the gods of olympus participate as well (high style [but remember that the gods will intervene later; is the merchant referring back to the gods' influence in human matters seen in the knight's tale?]); during it, januarie contemplates his bride with a mixture of __menacing lust__ and respectful, even tender __compassion__  - as if she was a sacrificial victim of his __lechery__. the style seems to become more and more pompous as the story progresses; we discover that a squire is in love with may as well. after the feast, januarie prepares for the sexual act by eating aphrodisiac food and clearing the house [of its servants]; but may is not satisfied with him.

2056. in another __surprising narrative move__, the merchant addresses the squire [damyan] explicitly, adding his __direct speech__ to the text of the poem [a strange "breaking of the iv wall" _in a narrative form; an intrusion of the extratextual reality within the boundaries of the poem_]; the squire, damyan, is sick for love; he writes a letter form may, and hides it in his chest; worried for him, januarie sends may and other dame to visit damyan; the squire gives her the letter, and she finds the privacy to read it only in the __latrine__ ["there as ye woot that every wight moot rede" - a perfect combination of fabliau and high style], where she tears the letter and throws it away. the merchant describes again the olds man's __lechery__, as he asks his wife to strip and play with him. may agrees to satisfy the squire's wish. the poet describes januarie's garden - a secret; the poet quotes the "roman de la rose" to praise its beauty. here, too, the two have often sex.

2263. in a boethian digression, the poet compares fortune to a scorpion [it is as if the entire piece ought to be read __ironically__ - as if its literal sense had to be __entirely subverted__ to access the allegorical, secondary one]. januarie suddenly grows healous, and constantly surveils may, who therefore cannot have damyan; but the two forge two keys for the secret garden [januarie has literally become blind by now], and they arrange to have damyan waiting for the married couple [inside the garden, on a tree]. as the three are found [gathered] there, engaged in a __suspended fabliau__ [suspended time] where the blind man confesses his jealousy and the smart squire awaits on the tree above him, the poet inserts a digression about "pluto" and "proserpyna," playing [chasing] in the same [literary] garden; pluto uses the fabliau as an example of the inconstancy and "untrouthe" of women; the scene is omne of the many tales that he could mention [pluto and proserpyna being a strange choice; he is the god of death, after all; and proserpina was forced to live with him].

2440. in another __strange narrative move__, the two gods start debating about the scene [_the knight's tale_ is a strong memory here], again quoting more authorities, and salomon in particular (the poet seems to emphasize the cultural and chronological contradiction [of two pagan gods referring to the christian scriptures]). through a trick, the woman makes januarie help her climb the tree, and there she starts having sex with damyan. but, right at that moment, pluto gives the old man his sight back; he is angered, but may makes him believe that his sight is still uncertain, and the tale ends well [that is, without further violence; the triangle can persist, with the old cheated husband remaining ideologically blind]. the host comments on the conlusion by referring to his wife [has he understood the actual meaning of the tale, then? or is he as blind as its character?].
