#Fragment 3

##Introduction

- the connection with the previous fragment is conjectural. the wife of bath's tale constitutes the core of the __marriage group__, which finds its completion between fragments 4 and 5; marriage is not the exclusive concern of these fragments, nor is its discussion exclusive to them. it is, however, the topic that chaucer seems to be addressing more explicitly.

- the genre of the wife of bath's prologue is that of a __literary confession__. it was probably inspired by the analogous monologue of la vieille in the _roman de la rose_; the books that jankyn refers to belong to an extensive tradition of anti-feminine literature. her tale is a short arthurian romaance; its message combines women's sovereignity with gentilesse.

- the friar's tale is based on a renown pattern; it is an exemplum. the characters concern is words [taken literally].

- the summoner's tale is a fabliau; it responds to the friar's story by turning words into wind.

##Comment

###The wife of bath's prologue

162. the wife begins by defining a topic - "mariage" - and a method - "experience"; she is not afraid, however, of using __textual authorities__ - and she arranges them __against__ each other; the gospels against the genesis [the praise of chastity against god's injuction to go forth and multiply], for instance. the problem is the number of mariages that she has had. __ethical problem__; __textual resolution__ made impossible by __contradiction__ [this would be the first problem, the model problem - how many marriages can we have? it finds no solution in the text, at least apparently; the different sources are simply juxtaposed until they reach a stage of self-evident contradiction; textual authority, then, would here be proved to be insufficient to address the question]. it is a strongly __argumentative text__. the wife justifies her behavior as a conscious choice; she concludes by asserting her __sovereignity__ over the men [the husbands; and this is the main claim of her confession].

370. the pardoner interrupts her by saying that, since that is the perspective, he will not marry; the wife asks him to wait until she has finished telling her story before deciding on the topic (then, __experience__ is the true authority [textual authority has been refused earlier, when its impossibility to solve her doubt was proved; notice that we are now considering a different topic, the objective value of marriage]). she starts by describing the three __happy marriages__, by which she gained land; this becomes an invitation to __imitate__ her speech [to use portions of her speech, as she is using portions of other people's speeches], with the purpose of obtaining more goods and wealth. she delivers a __hypothetical speech__ [hypothesis is the mode of romances] where she responds to the ideal accusations - misogynistic - addressed to her by her husband (the formula is an __anaphoric__ "thou seyst"). the tone becomes increasingly __aggressive__, and it contains references to a possible affair between her and the "apprentice janekyn." she insists on her independence and self-sovereignity [again, the core of the speech; but the topic changed again - from the praise of marriage to the worthiness of women].

562. the wife continues to possess and deliver, to __interpret__ again, the misogynistic discourses spoken by her previous husbands. then she describes her actual behavior - the __constant negotiation__ of her autonomy and sovereignity; it is, in a way, the convincing and passionate monologue that the character of a fabliau (or a romance?) would utter [and, paradoxically, her following story concerns a knight; why a knight? why not a female character? perhaps things will get clearer as we look at the shipman's tale]. the confession progresses through husbands and years [experience in the making; the experience of the knight in the subsequent tale, the experience of the pilgrims, both linear and circular; _consider how, in the end, both the tale and the whole poem suggest that learning is achieved through a combination of both, experience and learning - experience and speech, language, textual tradtion_], until the last one - the worst and most beloved [and it is a succession that brings no learning with it, that actually worsens rather than improve].

787. the marriage with jenkyns starts with a conventional scene of seduction, in the "feeldes" and accompanied by their go-between (a "gossip"); it ends, however, with jenkyn's literate misogynistic speech, and the wife's ripping of a page from his book of "wikked wyves" [the wife knows, apparently, a lot of astrology; she moves easily among these canonical sources], full of biblical and classical exempla; __refusal of a written tradition__. [is this sequence of wise texts, opening with genesis and the gospels, antithetical to the romance _that she will tell_?]

856. after the ripping of the book and a physical struggle, the two find a __compromise__; she gains her sovereignity, and the book is burnt [happy ending]. the prologue ends with the friar and sumonour arguing [about her long prologue; the friar scolds her for it, and the sumonour scolds the friar for the remark, telling him that it is not something that he should be concerned with].
