#The canterbury tales - fragment 7

|Contents|Form|Key-words|
|:---:|:---:|:---:|
|The shipman's tale; The Prioress's tale; Melibee; Sir Thopas; The Monk's Tale; The Nun Priest's Tale|Mixed: couplets (pentameter); rhyme royal; tail-rhyme stanza; prose; unique stanza (Monk)|Compilation; Trade; Substitution; Ambiguity; Misunderstanding; Foreignness; Miracle; Speech; Signs; Trial; Literary tradition; Dream; Translation; Fortune; Teaching; Scripture; Fictions; Repetition; Interpretation; Debate; Social detail; Providence|

##Ideas

- The Shipman's tale is about a woman selling her body to a monk; a __simple fabliau__ based on the motif of trade.

##Introduction

- the longest and the most varied of the groups of tales; probably formed __late in the production__ of the poem [when chaucer already knew what his work was about]; it obviously never received a final revision. it is harder to find a unifying topic for the tales here; some call it a __literary group__ (many genres).

- the __shipman's tale__ may be chaucer's __earliest fabliau__; it is relatively simple compared to the _miller's_ and the _reve's_ ones. it was probably initially told by the wife.

- the __prioress' tale__ is a __miracle of the virgin__, where __pathos and violence__ are emphasized.

- __chaucer's tale__ should serve as a relief from the prioress' somber tale; it is a __pastiche__ of many __minstrel romances__; these were a popular genre [with] which chaucer was probably well acquainted with.

	- it is a __parody__, both literary and social; _thopas_ is an __unworthy imitator__, like chaucer.

- the second tale told by chaucer is the __prose of the melibee__; this was, apparently, an immensely popular tale; it is an __allegorical debate__, translated from _albertanus of brescia_.

- the __monk's tale__ was probably written before the conception of c. t.; it is probably ch.'s first experiment with the __collection__ of __short narratives__; it is inspired by boccaccio's _de casibus virorum illoustrium_; it is exemplary in its treatment of __medieval tragedy__ (the influence of __fortune__). the stories are grim, and should show how happiness is deceptive.

- the __nun's priest's tale__ is a __beast fable__, with antecedents in _mdf's [marie de france] book_ as in the _roman de renard_; it is, however, expanded into a grandiose __mock-heroic tragedy__.

##The shipman's tale

207. the first few lines indeed assume a __narrator__ very reminiscent of the _wife of bath_; we have the quintessential premise of a __fabliau__; a merchant and his pretty wife, whom he pleases with gifts and clothes. in this perspective, the woman seems simply __another possession__; and the merchant and one of his "gestes," a "yonge monk" with whom he swears "eterne aliaunce" [this is the triangle, with the relationships based on _treuthe_ - the wife, the monk, the merchant]; and the merchant seems a positive character; he invites the monk to eat and drink and feast with him and his wife, trusting the friend. on the third day, the three characters are busy in different spaces - the merchant is counting his money, the monk is strolling in the garden, and the wife runs into the latter [juxtaposition of closed and open spaces]. the monk and the wife share a long and __suggestive__ dialogue, where the truth is revealed: the monk has no real feelings for the merchant, whom he cherishes only to approach the woman; and the woman hates him, and needs money [therefore, both the relationships that the merchant had _bought_, friendship and marriage, as revealed as insubstantial; eros may be stronger; or - better - another version of economy could be more profitable].

399. the two find a __secret agreement__; the wife tries to distract the husband from his occupations, but he insists on the grave importance of his business, which requires constant devotion. the three have dinner [food is a constant presence in this tale]; after that the monk announces that he's leaving for brugges, and he asks for a loan of "100 frankes." while the merchant is away, completing his tasks almost __virtuosly__ [again, the merchant is described as an irreprehensible figure; he is simply committed to his important job], the monk pays the wife to sleep with him [__inversion__; again, __substitution__, granted by an __economical premise__; the loan is what allows the monk to replace the merchant, even __morally__; money allows for a set of interactions that is independent from ethics; moreover, at times the most successful economical transactions are those that invert, subvert, the assumptions of ethics]. as the merchant returns, the monk explains that he has already restituted the money that he owed, to the wife [the transactions are described in great detail here; now it seems a tale that would hardly suit the _wife of bath_; __fine economical detail__, amost inaccessible to those who are strange to the profession]; the merchant returns home; there, after having enjoyed the company of the woman, he asks her about the loan.

452. asked to respond for the money, the wife blames the monk for being insincere about it, but explains that she will promplty repay her debt (a __transitive__ debt, that now she has contracted with her own husband) by giving him her body. the final word - an __ambiguous moral__ - belongs to the merchant "keep bet thy good," either the __money__ or the __body__; the whole tale seemed based on this equivalence. the hoost now asks the prioresse, afer having turned this tale into a parable _against monks_ [__misinterpretation__? the merchant from the tale, on the other hand, seems to have understood a little better what the deal was about].

##the prioress' prologue and tale

655. the prologue is a prayer to the lord and the virgin mary, treated as a __mother__; it uses images of __childhood__ and, eventually, it describes the __very narrator as an infant__, almost uncapable of articulate speech when confronted with the mystery of divinity [__ineffable__; and compassion for the human]. the tale, in __rhyme royal__, is set in asye, in a jewish ghetto, full of enemies of christ [strange country, strange people - strongly __antisemitic speech__ to describe a hostile context]; there we find a school full of christian chidren. one of them [ch. very rarely describes children] has learned __latin prayers by heart__, without knowing their meaning - by __imitation__ [he is somewhat illiterate]; apparently none of the children knows the actual meaning, but they learn these prayers rather than the school lessons. the child keeps singing in the ghetto, until one of the jews, inspired by satan, cuts his throat and throws his body in a pit. here the "wydwe's" complaint (she is the child's tutor) seems to be one with the narrator's; she looks for him - until when, for a miracle, his body rises and - his throat still slit - starts singing the prayers to mary [analogies with the _st. erkenwald_ tradition]. the christian community carries the child in triumph; and this counts as __proof__ of the jews' guilt, for which those who were aware of the murder are __tortured and killed__. continuing the miracle, the __child speaks__.

690. he speaks to the community of christians, and explains them the miracle; a "greyn" [here the link between the prioress' gluttony and the obsessive orality of her story] was placed on his tongue, to make him sing. when that is removed, he dies again [the grain is speech, food, and life]. everybody mourns.

##the prologue and tale of sir thopas

890. after the conclusion of the _prioress' tale_ every pilgrim seems distraught, and chaucer especially [he is looking down, and his gaze keeps shifting]. the hoost grabs him and shows him to the group; he is treated like a _popet_ - a doll - or a child. the prologue is still in the __rhyme royal__ used for the prioress; it is as if this section was __a continuation, a parody or a reenactment (reinterpretation)__ of the tale - the dumb child speaking with another man's voice, like a puppet [the grain is also an element of gluttony, perhaps]. the hoost and chaucer share the shape of their waist, but not the "countenance" - chaucer is secretive, the host outspoken. 

	- he is asked to tell a "tale of myrthee"; he humbly starts "a rhym" - the form is surprising - a __tail-rhyme stanza__ employed in many other m. e. poems [romances], with __irregular variations__ and __very short lines__. the tale uses __motifs of the romance tradition__ [cooper refers to it exstensively] - but with __flat characters__ and an __accumulation__ that is even __childish__. the description of an __unrealistic locus amoenus__ is followed by his memory of a __dream__ - here the metre includes an __odd bob__, almost a signal [drawn from the fashionable alliterative tradition?] that the tone is changing to include a __supernatural presence__ - about an "elf-queene," destined to become his "lemman"; he visits the __fairy land__, but there he only finds a giant [he is constantly called a __child__ - is chaucer trying to turn his character into that? is there an analogue of _piers plowman_'s section on chidhood here?], from whom he flees. then he prepares for a new fight, with another giant, after having enjoyed a __feast__ and having been armored [he wasn't before].

966. the battle is __interrupted__ by the host [chaucer has started to mention many similar poems and tropes; _accumulation of tradition_], who wants to put an end to this "rhyme dogerel" [he proves to possess a strong sense of __aesthetic worth__]; he tells chaucer that he should never rhyme again, but instead "telle in prose somewhat." chaucer will gladly do so - tell a story told "in sondry wise | of sondry folk"; he introduces a __translation__, and he prepares his audience for a work that will be faithful although different from the original, like the gospels [which tell the same true story, in different ways - all true; in a way, the paradigm of translation].

###the tale of menibee

1152. __in prose__. the story tells of melibeus, whose wife and daughter were beaten while he was away [__strange style__; little expressive, ans somehow too simple - stiff; _the role of the daughter - wounded to death - is marginal, yet haunting; she seems even forgotten in the rest of the tale_]; he is weeping and despairing when his wife, prudence, starts __consoling__ him. she arhues for __moderation__, even in grief; she quotes from __classical authorities__ and from the __scriptures__; it is a __consolation__ - a guide on how to __respond to tragedy__. following her advice, melibeus seeks the "conseil" of wise friends, and of former enemies - with whom he wishes to fight [_ambiguous reading; he wishes to fight in general, against the "adversaries" who disgraced his family; and he has unresolved business with his former enemies - but the two are different_]; they advise him [the scene echoes the _merchant's tale_]; the debate concerns the decision to take __revenge on the enemies__- whether to start a war or to prevent one. those who argue for peace are scorned by the young loud men; ch. considers that wisdom is often __boring__ [is he talking about prose? about this tale and the _parson's_?]. the wife too recommends peace; but he argues that he will not consider her opinion [the topics of "__maistrie__," marriage, and the process of decision are all here, like the rest of the __marriage group__]; as if embodying the position of the _clerk_ and that of the _wife of bath_, prudence reponds to each point of her husband's argument - with logic and __evidence__ from __textual authorities__; the husband agrees to trust her; then she begins explaining how to choose the right "__counsil__" [a definitive, rational and thoroughly sustained confirmation of the _wife of bath_'s standpoint]. 

1354. many similarities with the _parson's tale_; it is the same kind of deep, boring truth - of plain advice that seems distant from the objects that it actually considers; __plain prose__. the quantity of sources quoted here is overwhelming, evend distracting; __pieces of knowledge__ [is this a continuation of the critique of learning and textual authority that we have found in the _monk's tale_ and in _sir thopas_? the chlidishness of too much knowledge? perhaps the child of the _prioress' tale_, in his illiterate innocence, was a positive model; it is impossible for us to return to that ideal]. the wife (prudence) fitst concludes her theoretical explanation of __how to use advice__; then she corrects her husband's mistakes in the present time, giving him some concrete, practical recommendations; she uses her reasoning and the rest of the authorities [as if they were __counselors__] to decide over the best course of action for the husband. from time to time there seem to be references to __sins__ [the seven sins that will structure the parson's tale].

1552. after having examined these options in detail, and by juxtaposing them with __other authorities__ [textual], prudence expands the scope of her speech - turning it into an invitation to abandon the "material richnesses" and return to the path of god. the tone maintains a wider religious and philosophical perspective as the two discuss the rest of the problems - __revenge, fortune, patience__. prudence is truly __becoming an allegory__.

1767. the two are now discussing __poverty and richness__; but the wife's eventual recommendation concerns __peace__. to persuade her husband of her good intentions, she even needs to make "semblant of wrathe." the husband eventually agrees - so much that he seems to have granted her "maistrie." she asks to speak with the rest of his "adversaries in privee place"; there she persuades them of the __value of peace__. she actually __makes peace__ [from historical person, to knowledge, to allegory, to action].

1887. [it is as if, in the final section, the personification had possessed a character again, to show how it is useful to __interpret__ (or perform) her; _to have prudence inside of you; the pattern is the one already seen in the late xiv s. dream allegory; from the vision of prudence, we have the textual tradition of prudence - the book about prudence - which is ultimately assimilated - eaten - by the main character_.] by addressing more counselors with her wisdom, prudence eventually achieves a truly __collective peace__; now the solution can be found through a __diplomatic and legal trial__; melibee has to decide about the __punishment__. instead of disinheriting and exiling them, he decides to grant them "grace and mercy." a __pacifist conclusion__ [the opposite of the prioress'? _a very adult world_].

##the monk's prologue and tale

2078. the hoost responds, again, by mentioning how much __his wife__ [it is as if the whole marriage group could be interpreted as a series of narrative suggestions, or debates, presented to the host himself; notice how he _de-allegorizes_ the tale, and interprets it literally as a story about a wife and her husband] would profit from the example set by the tale; [like the prioress?] his wife is __merciless__ when it comes to punishment. he then addresses the monk, whom he praises for his good, healthy looks; he even wishes that the monk could __procreate__, because he seems to have the right body for it (a strange compliment [in a way, though, the monk's tale is about the succession of generations, the transmission of knowledge from fathers to sons, history and education]). the monk introduces his tale as a sequence of "tragedies," told in "exametron" (a careful premise about the genre); the form is a series of __tail-rhyme stanzas__. the narratives are fast paced and expressive; they are based on __stark contrasts__ between __happiness and disgrace__, caused by __human sin__ [but not all of them].

2278. they are __falls__ - literal and metaphorical, like the one of sampson's temple. hercules' death is, for instance, not justified by any previous sin; just the __changes of fortune__; the following two, _nabucodonosor_ and _belthazar_, are connected by the figure of _david_ [__daniel__?], who ties to warn the son by reminding him of his father's fall - in vain. history seems __cyclical__ - the __repetition of the same pattern__, the impossibility of learning - of interpreting - these same stories correctly. after them we have _cenobia_, the queen in the wilderness, forced to marry.

2462. the narrator insists on the __number of books__ that the chaste queen would read (books, like the ones read by the monk?), thus she ruled wisely, and remained __virtuous__; nevertheless, __fortune__ eventually punishes her - through __history__. he then briefly mentions some historical figures of the middle ages, concluding with _dante's ugolino_ [as prof. crane pointed out, it would be interesting to look at the translation again from the standpoint of the frustration of learning through history; is _translation_ chosen especially because it makes the source colder, less impactful?]; then he moves to _nero_ and rome.

2670. nero started as a fortunate man, although he was wicked; the monk also reminds us of his __education__, which nevertheless produced an irrational, evil man. __fortune__, however, does not seem to punish him for his sins, but only to avenge against him for his __pride__ [a pride of which fortune would be even envious; she is, therefore, not acting as a just god, but as a capricious force, attached to transitory human values]. the __misinterpretation__ of teaching and history remains a __constant__ - before being beheaded "oloferno" would praise "nabucodonosor" as a god. the monk is simultaneously inviting us to read more, although these same stories seem to prove the uselessness of reading. "antiocho" is punished by god for his hatred of "jeues"; his punishment is the most disgusting and possibly [the most] painful [of the series]. follows _alexander_, whose story is known by all.

2766. like alexander, julius caesar is described as a virtuous man, punished by an __irrational__ force of __history__. the final tragedy is that of cresus; he survives many adversities, until the night when he __misinterpreted__ a dream of ruin as one of fortune [a possible connection with the following tale, and chaunticleer's misinterpreted dream?]; he dreams of glory, whereas - as his daughter explains - he will be "anhanged." __exemplary fall__.

##the nun's priest prologue and tale

2969. surprisingly, it is the knight who interrupts the monk; he finds the very idea of a fall from fortune "a grete disese" [cooper comments on this; it is another confirmation that the knight's literary world is one of idealization and _providence_, not _fate_]; whereas he enjoys telling and listening to tales that relate the __opposite circumstance__ - __rising__ [_from fall to fortune_; why the knight, one might ask - what does he stand for? the idealization of literature, of romance? or are we supposed to understand that he has fallen from __fortune__ too? _(his clothing would support this hypothesis; and, in general, his clothing is a good confirmation of the fact that the knight's reality is different from his idealized world)_]; the host is annoyed by these __frustrating tales__ as well; their __pedagogical value__ seems very little, and the tale might have been "told in vayn"; the monk refuses to speak more, so that the host asks the _nun's priest_; despite his weak horse, he will tell a "myrie" tale.

	- his story starts by describing a virtuous widow and her __healthy diet__; she never eats neither too much nor too little, in __moderation__. but the focus shifts to one of her __possessions__ [a cause of what she can eat; _one of the conditions of her well-being_] - the "cok" chauntecleer, who had an exact __control of time__, and "sevene hennes" in his "governaunce"; all treated with courtly decency; he is described in __detail__. ch. specifies that back then the "beestes and bruddes koude speake and singe" [is there a potential connection with the _squire's tale_?]. the story opens when he awakes from a bad dream, and asks his favorite, most beloved hen - "pertelote" - for an __interpretation__. he dreamt of being chased by a fox - the wife scolds him for his fear, and explains that dreams aren't but "vanitee," caused by an __irregular distribution__ of __bodily humors__; she recommends "purge" and "laxatyf"; she even recommends a series of __herbs__ which, found in the garden, could heal potential sicknesses [her approach is alimentary; his approach is literary; the two seem to lead to no solution; are they equivalent?].

3171. the cok answers by arguing for the portentousness of dreams; he quotes from different authorities and uses __short exempla__; his style is refined and __pompous__, with many digressions that do not seem entirely relevant to his purpose [it is remarkable how animals are present in the __exempla__ recounted by the cok - as a secondary or functional presence; _objects or instruments, not individuals; it is strangely similar and dissimilar to the monk's tale_, as if the cok was something else, as if his __act of telling__ made him different from the objects being told]; some exempla are shared with the __tragedies__ told by the monk - it's as if the cok too was __unable to learn__ [he is citing the useless stories _of a different species_]; in fact, he is even quoting his latin "confusio" wrong [and in this he is similar to the child in the prioress' tale].

3368. having found a __corn__ [is "the grein" in the prioress' tale an analogous object?], chaunticleer stops his speech, and starts eating and copulating [__distractions from what is transcendent__]; he is royal and proud. a __complex astronomical periphrasis__ introduces a moment of bliss; chauntecleer reads the motions of the stars with an apparently __exact skill__. the priest reminds his audience that his tale is as true as _lancelot_; he [the priest] is introducing a __change in fortune's course__ [aligning his tale not only with the tradition of allegorical narrative, but also with the monk's brief _tragedies_]. now it is the narrator's voice that has become pompous [progressively so, from the moderation of the human wife to the excesses of this section], full of epic references; a fox is hiding in the cabbage, waiting to murder chauntecleer. the priest includes a short, but surprisingly dense, digression on __providence__, god's __foreknowledge__, and __free will__, which he dispels by reminding the audience that his "tale is of a cok," and shifts to a misogynistic rant about distrusting "wommenes conseils" [thus connecting his tale with the __marriage group__, and _melibee's_]. now the narrative rapidly juxtaposes __animal behavior__ with __personification__ [that is, animals act now like animals and now like humans], and eloquent, learned speech; the fox is trying to persuade the cok to sing for him, with his eyes closed. the cok does so, and the fox snatches him; follows an emphasized, epic complaint, by the priest and the hens [who are, therefore, brought to the same level of pure sound].

3462. the hen's cry stirs the women of the house, who start chasing the fox; the scene is one of general commotion, with every animal and human animal from the house; the scene is compared to the __peasant's revolt__ of 1381 [a tragic and violent historical event, whose memory must have been terribly recent]. during this confusion, the cok manages to __outsmart the fox__ by persuading him to speak - a __change in fortune__ [actually __caused__ by the cok's __actions__]. the priest concludes by asking us to take "the fruyt, and lat the chaf be still" [a lesson in interpretation and the pedagogical use of stories such as this], learn from the moral. the host congratulates the priest for the story, and compares him to the cok; again, like in other circumstances, he praises his good looks - for women [the host often identifies with women and acquires their gaze, to look specifically at men].
