#Floris and Blancheflour

##Introduction

- one of the most popular stories of the middle ages; versions of it exist in all western europe.

- the one in m.e. exists in __four ms.__; the antecedent is an old french version from 1160-1170.

- the m. e. was probably composed around 1250; this would make it the __second oldest m. e. romance after king horn__; this one, however, is an oriental tale of exoticism.

- the four ms. are relatively old: two from the late xiii s., the auchinleck (1330) and the london egerton (1400). the original work probably came from the southeast midlands.

	- we have lost the beginning of the text in all ms.; its contents can be deduced from the french.

- there is very little fighting itn this romance; the focus is all on the two lovers.

- like king horn, this text is characterized by __repetitions__ and structural patterns.

- the older introduction distinguishes between an __aristocratic__ and a "__less cultured__" version of the story. according to this edition, the english belongs to the first category, abridged.

##Comment

74. like amis and amiloun, the two lovers are born on the same day; one christian, the other pagan. florys is first seen learning "letters," in the version that we have (after the initial lacuna); he asks to "lerne" with blancheflour. they learn through mutual love; they learn "latyne" and "wryte on parchemyn"; their love "in scole" is so strong that, to put an end to it, the king wishes to see blancheflour "deed." the wife [who works as the moderate side, as a mediator] suggests to send him away.

166. the purpose of the two monarchs is to __undo__ this dangerous love [forbidden because of their social and cultural difference; but we also suspect a hint to the incest]. they send floris away, having promised to him that he will see blancheflour within two weeks. at the foreign court, however, floris cannot be __distracted__ by any entertainment from his love. it is his sole __dominant thought__. having learnt this, the monarchs (the queen always being the more moderate side) decides to sell the girl to a merchant. this is presented as a gentle, "curtayse" man; he manages to sell her for money and a wonderful "coupe." he speaks "moony langages."

270. the cup depicts paris' kidnapping of helen, and it was owned by eneas and cesar; it is the cup of __history__ [ekphrasis as the synecdoche of history, with its immobility representing the entirety of time; ekphrasis as the suspension of history]. blancheflour is then sold to the "amyral of babylon"; the poet always specifies the sum in detail (he seems very interested in __materiality__; trade is a form of __exchange__, substitution, translation - like for amis and amiloun); with the money gained from the trade, they make a rich tomb for her. returned home, floris looks for her, and he learns about her death. he is led to the grave, and, having read the __inscription__ (__writing__ is crucial here) he swoons, weeps, and laments.

366. we have a report of floris' lament, directly quoted. he complains about unjust death; having been born on the same day, they should die on the same day. he tries to kill himself, but his mother discovers him in time. having discussed the problem with the king (a strong motif, the deliberation of the monarchs and their influence on these events [the monarchs seem in fact to stand for the obscure and uncontrollable forces of history]); they decide to reveal their "engynne" to the son, and they open the grave to show him that it is empty. florys asks his father to give him horses and money to travel to find her, disguised as a merchant. he is given the golden cup, and a red and white horse. all by the king.

466. the gear that the redeemed monarchs now offer their son is as rich as it could be; he is also given a magical ring of invulnerability from the queen. florys is cheered as if he was going to __die__ ["on bere"; a journey that resembles sir orfeo's]. at the "havene" where blancheflour was sold, the family hosting the two disguised knights suspect that florys might be no merchant, because he is __not eating his food__. the lady of the house tells him that he looks "ilich here of alle thinge, | of semblant and of mourning, | but thou art a man and she is a maide." she tells him where she is, so that he travels to babylon; there the amerail has announced a great "feste." in the city, floris is hosted well.

570. the house offers him "fissc, flessch, tendre bred," but he eats nothing [another crucial motif]; again he reminds his host of blancheflour [he is treading on her footsteps; he is embodying the __memory__, the __impressions__, that she has left on people]; this host suggests that he look for a trusted friend of his, who "trewthe iplight" with him; he uses a ring as a sign of trust ("to toking"); with the friend, the scene is repeated: food without hunger.

689. the friend, daris, describes all the __obstacles__ that separate floris from his beloved; to look for her seems a __desperate mission__; we have a good, detailed description of __fortifications__, which becomes almost __visionary, allegorical, marvelous__ - as the friend describes the inner sections of the palace, the "orchard" where the amirail's wives are kept; at the centre of this garden, a "welle" whose "strem com fram paradis" [__this is__, by the way, the detail that you though could have been inspired by actual reports from the middle east; this fictional space seems strikingly similar to the arabic courtyards found in southern spain; even its allegorical interpretation would be similar]; the welle, enchanted, identifies the women who are not virgins. besides it, the miraculous "tre of love," choosing them [choosing the ideal candidate among the many wives; it is a marvel explained through a combination of technology and magic].

790. having heard the description, floris swoons three times. but daris has a plan: to befriend the porter of the palace, who is a greedy "colvard and feloun," by playing chess and betting money on it, and by eventually giving him the cup [__transaction__, only more __elaborate__; notice how all the elements from the final section of _amis and amiloun_ are repeated here - the identical pair, the gates of the castle, the cup serving as a token; this romance being a sort of rewriting of that one]. having followed this advice, floris eventually confesses his true intentions to the porter [he had been disguised as a "ginour"], who is obliged to help him with a "ginne," havinhg become "his man."

869. florys is placed in one of the baskets (coupen [the word is the same used for the cup representing blancheflour's worth; as if this "ginne" could also be read as a version of the slave trade involving the woman]) that bring flowers inside the castle; the poet stresses the __difference__ in weight, although the __substitution__ is successful; but the basket is brought to the wrong maid - clarice. like the other characters in the poem, however, she __understands__ the misunderstanding [floris is, by himself, readable as a match for blancheflour], and lies to the maids who, summoned by her cry, have rushed into her room; she tells them that she shireked because a butterfly, hidden in her basket of flowers, scared her [this romance has a very realistic way of treating some __gestures and reactions__]. she goes to see blancheflour, who is grieving because the amirail has requested her as his wife; clarice then leads her to her room, telling her that she should see a precious flower: __floris__ [linguistic playfulness in a foreign environment, just like for _laustic_].

969. the meeting is accompanied by embraces, kisses, tears. clarice insists on the __identification__ between floris and a flower; she won't denounce them to the king, being full of "__fin amour__"; insteadm she invites them to enjoy her bed [not entirely sure about this detail; there is some ambiguity in these lines], and closes the "courtyn roum" [like pandarus]. but, we learn that the amirail has the habit of being served by two different maids every morning, for his toilette; and that morning it happened to be the turn of clarice and blancheflour. only clarice shows up, but she __invents a good lie__ about blancheflour watching and praying for his health [fiction, another trait found in pandarus].

1071. the episode happens again; this time the amirail sends his "chaumberlayn," who discovers the two lovers in bed. the ameral runs there, and discovers them too; but the scene has to be uncovered further - the amiral pulls down the blankets, to __discover the differences__ in their bodies - one is a man, the other a woman; they are still asleep (is this the gost of incest?); he decides to have a __trial__, with barons and foreign kings, who keep calling them "__children__"; they are summoned in front of them.

1173. the two think that they are going to die; floris gives his mother's ring of invincibility [invulnerability?] to blancheflour; she refuses it, and the ring is tossed away. the fairness and sweetness of the children causes the crowd to feel pity for them, especially since one of the dukes, who saw the scene of the ring, retells it to the gathering. __collective empathy__; the two children strive for who should die first. the amerail is eventually __moved to compassion__ [like with horn]; he decides to spare their life if they will tell him their "gin."

1227. the stratagem could, in fact, have been used for __war__, not for love [the impenetrable castle is a fortification used against armed enemies, not lovers, as we are reminded in this conclusion]; floris explains that the porter helped him. floris is rewarded with knighthood and a marriage to the maiden; after some time, he is summoned home to take possession of his own land, after the death of his father. both return to _cristendom_.