#Stanzaic Guy of Warwick

##Introduction

- the source is the a. n. gui de warewic, written in england around 1220; the m. e. translator chose to adapt only one third of that story.

- the form is a twelve-line tail rhyme stanza, with octosyllabic lines.

- the only extant copy is in the auchinleck ms.; there it follows a romance in couplets concerning the early years of guy's life, and it is followed by a sequel, reinbroun, telling the adventures of guy's son; they were independent [pieces; written at different times by different hands, and probably unawarely of each other].

- the language is an east midlands dialect.

- the stanzaic form encourages formular repetition and structural echoes.

- the focus is mostly __hagiographical__; the "exile-and-return" plot is framed around pilgrimage.

##Comment

324. the opening section shifts from the motif of the "story heard and retold" to a summary of guy's youth; the two are merged, as if one could lead to the other. the focus then shifts to his and felice's wish to marry, and on their happy wedding; the pace is __slow and balanced__; it alternates between __direct dialogue__ [long, elaborate utterances; it relies heavily on speech and exposition of events by the same characters] and slow third person exposition; everything leads to a __night of contemplation__, when gui, looking at the "firmament" [lyrical and hagiographical moment], realizes that his life ignored "jhesu love"; he tells felice of his intention; in a __direct dialogue__, she keeps doubting - perhaps, she thinks, he has __another woman__ [another marriage, somewhere else; the motif seems that of vita activa and vita contemplativa; as if guy had to start a different, mixed life to obtain forgiveness; interestingly, he does not try to involve his beloved wife at all; and she is described as uncapable of understanding].

660. guy explicitly wants to repent for the violence and destruction that he has brought upon people; as he leaves, we follow felice's perspective; she complains to her father, an earl, who sends out knights to look for him. the poet apparently juxtaposes two __different geographies__ - a __secular__ one, where guy is untraceable [impossible to find], and a __sacred__ one, where we follow him now; in "antioge" he finds a venerable man, tormenting himself for repentance. he explains that he has lost all his sons to a saracen horde; there is war in these holy lands too.

960. the man explains that one of the sultan's sons got infuriated to one of his sons, for a game of chess - a festive game turned into __violence__; the sultan's son dies, and he should be avenged by a monstrously gigantic "sarayne"; to fight against the giant for him, the venerable man has sought guy everywhere [contrasting geographies, and problematic agnition]. guy, keeping his real identity concealed, agrees to fight for him.

1272. guy's fake name is "youn"; the man's name is "erl jonas." the king of that land interrogates guy, reminding him that he hates "inglond" and its knights, because guy himself murdered his uncle [two guys, then - the knight and the pilgrim; __two identities__, one redeeming the other]; nevertheless, guy manages to find a peaceful agreement with him; then they ride to the sultan's city, where guy fights the monstrous opponent - a giant from hell, in a battlefield outside the walls. the battle is, as usual, long and violent. guy prays god during it [a small, intimate prayer].

1596. assisted by "help of crist," he manages to hit the giant; for his strength in battle, he is recognized as guy. the two fight furiously; they exchange a __favour__, allowing each other to drink from a river; to obtain the favour in return, however, guy has to __confess his identity__; but this causes the giant's full rage. __water__ has a special __strategic__ (and __symbolic__? as baptism? or as purification?) function. guy runs to the river; after that the long fight ends with his victory.

1896. guy refuses to accept land as a reward for his valor; but he reveals his name to jonas [__agnition__, after bravery and humility]; then he travels to greece. in constantinoples he finds another venerable man who is seeking him - his name is "erl tirri." again, he has prompted the hostility of a local authority through a misundertanding, during a __peaceful occasion__ (a parlement). again the useless search [for guy - _and what if the romance should, instead be read as a tale against contemplation, as a sort of anti-hagiography, where guy cannot escape the social role that has been imposed onto him? sought everywhere by people in need, he decides to return home; his role was that of a warrior, not a pilgrim; that is what god is asking from him]; again guy moved to __compassion__.

2196. the two ride to the court; as they travel, a __miracle__ occurs - "an ermine" coming out of tirri's mouth, and flying back inside it; this happens while tirri has a __prophetic dream__, indicating a dragon and a treasure. they find both; guy keeps a __magical sword__, from heaven; as they arrive to the court, guy introduces himself as a pilgrim, then starts accusing the emperor of mistreating tirri. he is recognized as a match for guy [another motif; he __reminds__ everybody of guy, although nobody entirely recognizes him - an almost complete agnition]; again he fights for his friend.

2496. as they fight against each other, guy is mistaken by some for "an angel from haven cam, for tirri batayle to fong" [__guy becomes - almost - an angel__]. during the battle, tirri prays for him, again identifying him with an image of guy. but the emperor's men decide to put an end to the battle by throwing the mysterious fighting pilgrim, together with his bed, into the water. through divine intervention, however, he is saved by a __providential__ fisherman. in the meanwhile, the emperor scolds berard.

2796. the battle is resumed; berard is killed [there seems to be an __increase in violence__ as the plot unfolds]. having been avenged, tirri follows his savior - who again refuses any material rewards - in the rest of his adventures. having left the city, guy reminds tirri of his former friendship with the warrior, guy [his other identity] - has he forgotten him [since he has now chosen a different ally and friend, the pilgrim guy]? it is a __painful agnition__ - tirri weeps and cries for __not having recognized__ him [all this seems reminiscent of the gospels; the constant misinterpretation of christ's identity; peter's denial]. they depart; guy tells his friend to return to his lord; he reminds him of __divine salvation__, which he must seek [paradoxical reccomendation - a combination of _vita activa_, devotion to the secular hierarchy, and _vita contemplativa_, memory of god].

3096. on a ship destined to england, guy learns that his country has been attacked by daniel, and now endangered. in winchester, the king despairs with his parliament for the lack of a knight that may fight against the __invader__ [there is no warrior; the organism of peace is incapable to deal with the emergency of a war; again, the role of guy, as a warrior, seems a necessity; the real purpose of the tale seems to be an ideal redemption of the previous part of guy's life; his duty, approved by god, was to fight for his country]; on that night, "an angel from heven-light" visits him, telling him to seek a pilgrim. the battle that ensues is preceded by __many prayers, solemn and collective__; it is also the most ominous one, with detailed descriptions of armors [and weapons; the richest gear of the poem, described in fine detail].

3336. guy is now more afraid than ever. but he manages to behead his enemy, and he is carried in a holy procession to winchester; he reveals his identity to the king, then goes to warwick.

3589. in warwick guy stays outside the walls of the palace [like amiloun]; he then goes to live in a hut, and he is visited by an __angel__ who announces to him his imminent death; having learnt this, guy sends the ring - used as a love token - to felice; having recognized it, she goes to the "ermitage," only to see him die [are these echoes from the gospel?]. a __miracle__ happens at the moment of his death: his body is so heavy that it cannot be moved. he is buried there; two weeks later, felice dies too. sir tirri, having heard of their death, rides there. he builds an __abbey__ on that ground.
